

War  and  Peace


BY  LEO  TOLSTOY


Translated  b\  LOUISE  and  AYLMER  MAUDE


WILLIAM  BENTON,  Publisher


ENCYCLOPEDIA  BR1TANNICA,  INC.


CHICAGO  -  LONDON  -  TORONTO


BY  ARRANGEMENT  WITH  OXFORD  UNIVERSITY  PRESS


COPYRIGHT  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  OF  AMERICA,  1952,
BY  ENCYCLOPEDIA  BRITANNICA,INC.

COPYRIGHT  1952.   COPYRIGHT  UNDER  INTERNATIONAL  COPYRIG^
ENCYCLOP  *:DIA  BRITANNICA,  INC.   ALL  RIGHTS  RESERVED  UNDER
COPYRIGHT  CONVENTIONS  BY  ENCYCLOPEDIA  BRITANJ^


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE
LEO  TOLSTOY,  1828—1910


COUNT  LEO  NIKOLAYEVICH  TOLSTOY  was  born
August  28,  1828,  at  the  family  estate  of  Yasna-
ya  Polyana,  in  the  province  of  Tula.  His  moth-
er died  when  he  was  three  and  his  father  six
years  later.  Placed  in  the  care  of  his  aunts,  he
passed  many  of  his  early  years  at  Kazan,  where,
in  1844,  after  a  preliminary  training  by  French
tutors,  he  entered  the  university.  He  cared  lit-
tle for  the  university  and  in  1847  withdrew  be-
cause of  "ill-health  and  domestic  circum-
stances." He  had,  however,  done  a  great  deal
of  reading,  of  French,  English,  and  Russian
novels,  the  New  Testament,  Voltaire,  and
Hegel.  The  author  exercising  the  greatest  in-
fluence upon  him  at  this  time  was  Rousseau;
he  read  his  complete  works  and  for  sometime
wore  about  his  neck  a  medallion  of  Rousseau.

Immediately  upon  leaving  the  university,
Tolstoy  returned  to  his  estate  and,  perhaps  inr
spired  by  his  enthusiasm  for  Rousseau,  pre-
pared to  devote  himself  to  agriculture  and  to
improving  the  condition  of  his  serfs.  His  first
attempt  at  social  reform  proved  disappointing,
and  after  six  months  he  withdrew  to  Moscow
and  St.  Petersburg,  where  he  gave  himself  over
to  the  irregular  life  characteristic  of  his  class
and  time.  In  1851,  determined  to  "escape  my
debts  and,  more  than  anything  else,  my  hab-
its," he  enlisted  in  the  Army  as  a  gentleman-
volunteer,  and  went  to  the  Caucasus.  While  at
Tiflis,  preparing  for  his  examinations  as  a
cadet,  he  wrote  the  first  portion  of  the  trilogy,
Childhood,  Boyhood,  and  Youth,  in  which  he
celebrated  the  happiness  of  "being  with  Na-
ture, seeing  her,  communing  with  her."  He  al-
so began  The  Cossacks  with  the  intention  of
showing  that  culture  is  the  enemy  of  happi-
ness. Although  continuing  his  army  life,  he
gradually  came  to  realize  that  "a  military  ca-
reer is  not  for  me,  and  the  sooner  I  get  out  of
it  and  devote  myself  entirely  to  literature  the
better."  His  Sevastopol  Sketches  (1855)  were
so  successful  that  Czar  Nicholas  issued  special
orders  that  he  should  be  removed  from  a  post
of  danger.

Returning  to  St.  Petersburg,  Tolstoy  was  re-
ceived with  great  favor  in  both  the  official  and
literary  circles  of  the  capital.  He  soon  became


interested  in  the  popular  progressive  move-
ment of  the  time,  and  in  1857  he  decided  to  go
abroad  and  study  the  educational  and  munici-
pal systems  of  other  countries.  That  year,  and
again  in  1860,  he  traveled  in  Europe.  At  Yas-
naya  Polyana  in  1861  he  liberated  his  serfs  and
opened  a  school,  established  on  the  principle
that  "everything  which  savours  of  compulsion
is  harmful."  He  started  a  magazine  to  promote
his  notions  on  education  and  at  the  same  time
served  as  an  official  arbitrator  for  grievances
between  the  nobles  and  the  recently  emanci-
pated serfs.  By  the  end  of  1863  he  was  so  ex-
hausted that  he  discontinued  his  activities  and
retired  to  the  steppes  to  drink  koumis  for  his
health.

Tolstoy  had  been  contemplating  marriage
for  some  time,  and  in  1862  he  married  Sophie
Behrs,  sixteen  years  his  junior,  and  the  daugh-
ter of  a  fashionable  Moscow  doctor.  Their
early  married  life  at  Yasnaya  Polyana  was
tranquil.  Family  cares  occupied  the  Countess,
and  in  the  course  of  her  life  she  bore  thirteen
children,  nine  of  whom  survived  infancy.  Yet
she  also  acted  as  a  copyist  for  her  husband,
who  after  their  marriage  turned  again  to  writ-
ing. He  was  soon  at  work  upon  "a  novel  of
the  i8io's  and  *2o's"  which  absorbed  all  his
time  and  effort.  He  went  frequently  to  Mos-
cow, "studying  letters,  diaries,  and  traditions"
and  "accumulated  a  whole  library"  of  histori-
cal material  on  the  period.  He  interviewed
survivors  of  the  battles  of  that  time  and  trav-
eled to  Borodino  to  draw  up  a  map  of  the
battleground.  Finally,  in  1869,  after  his  work
had  undergone  several  changes  in  conception
and  he  had  "spent  five  years  of  uninterrupted
andjgxceptionally  strenuous  labor  Tnnierthe
IbesfcondUtions  of  life/'  he  published  War  and
Peace.  Its  appearance  immediately  established
Tolstoy's  reputation,  and  in  the  judgment  of
Turgenev,  the  acknowledged  dean  of  Russian
letters,  gave  him  "first  place  among  all  our
contemporary  writers."

The  years  immediately  following  the  com-
pletion of  War  and  Peace  were  pa**efl  in  a
great  variety  of  occupations,  none  of  which
Tohtoy  found  satisfying.  He  tried  busying


VI


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE


himself  with  the  affairs  of  his  estate,  under-
took the  learning  of  Greek  to  read  the  ancient
classics,  turned  again  to  education,  wrote  a
series  of  elementary  school  books,  and  served
as  school  inspector.  With  much  urging  from
his  wife  and  friends,  he  completed  Anna  Kare-
nina,  which  appeared  serially  between  1875
and  1877.  Disturbed  by  what  he  considered  his
unreflective  and  prosperous  existence,  Tolstoy
became  increasingly  interested  in  religion.  At
first  he  turned  to  the  orthodox  faith  of  the
people.  Unable  to  find  rest  there,  he  began  a
detailed  examination  of  religions,  and  out  of
his  reading,  particularly  of  the  Gospels,  gradu-
ally evolved  his  own  personal  doctrine.

Following  his  conversion,  Tolstoy  adopted
a  new  mode  of  life.  He  dressed  like  a  peasant,
devoted  much  of  his  time  to  manual  work,
learned  shoemaking,  and  followed  a  vegetari-
an diet.  With  the  exception  of  his  youngest
daughter,  Alexandra,  Tolstoy's  family  re-
mained hostile  to  his  teaching.  The  breach  be-
tween him  and  his  wife  grew  steadily  wider.
In  1879  he  wrote  the  Kreutzer  Sonata  in  which
he  attacked  the  normal  state  of  marriage  and
extolled  a  life  of  celibacy  and  chastity.  In  1881
he  divided  his  estate  among  his  heirs  and,  a
few  years  later,  despite  the  opposition  of  his
wife,  announced  that  he  would  forego  royal-
ties on  all  the  works  published  after  his  con-
version.

Tolstoy  made  no  attempt  at  first  to  propa-
gate his  religious  teaching,  although  it  attracted


many  followers.  After  a  visit  to  the  Moscow
slums  iri  1881,  he  became  concerned  with  social
conditions,  and  he  subsequently  aided  the  suf-
ferers of  the  famine  by  sponsoring  two  hun-
dred and  fifty  relief  kitchens.  After  his  meet-
ing and  intimacy  with  Chertkov,  "Tolstoyism"
began  to  develop  as  an  organized  sect.  Tol-
stoy's writings  became  almost  exclusively  pre-
occupied with  religious  problems.  In  addition
to  numerous  pamphlets  and  plays,  he  wrote
IV hat  is  Art?  (1896),  in  which  he  explained
his  new  aesthetic  theories,  and  Hadji-Murad,
(1904),  which  became  the  favorite  work  of  his
old  age.  Although  his  activities  were  looked
upon  with  increasing  suspicion  by  the  official
authorities,  Tolstoy  escaped  official  censure
until  1901,  when  he  was  excommunicated  by
the  Orthodox  Church.  His  followers  were  fre-
quently  subjected  to  persecution,  and  many
were  either  banished  or  imprisoned.

Tolstoy's  last  years  were  embittered  by
mounting  hostility  within  his  own  household.
Although  his  personal  life  was  ascetic,  he  felt
the  ambiguity  of  his  position  as  a  preacher  of
poverty  living  on  his  great  estate.  Finally,  at
the  age  of  eighty-two,  with  the  aid  of  his  daugh-
ter, Alexandra,  he  fled  from  home.  His  health
broke  down  a  few  days  later,  and  he  was  re-
moved from  the  train  to  the  station-master's
hut  at  Astopovo,  where  he  died,  November  7,
1910.  He  was  buried  at  Yasnaya  Polyana,  in
the  first  public  funeral  to  be  held  in  Russia
without  religious  rites.


CONTEXTS


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE  v

The  Principal  Characters  in  War  and  Peace

Arranged  in  Family  Groups  xv

Dates  of  Principal  Historical  Events  xvi

BOOK  ONE

1-5.  Anna  Sche'rer's  soiree  i

6-3.  Pierre  at  Prince  Andrew's  1 1

9.  Pierre   at  Anatole  Kurdgin's.  D61ok-

hov's  bet  15

10.  A  name  day  at  the  Rost6vs'  18

11-1*4.  Natasha  and  Boris  20

15.  Anna  Mikhdylovna  and  Bon's  go  to  the

dying  Count  Beziikhov's  26

16.  Pierre  at  his  father's  house;  talks  with

Boris  27

17.  Countess  Rost6va  and  Anna  Mikhay-

lovna  30

18-19.  Dinner  at  the  Rost6vs'.  Marya  Dmitri-

cvna  31

20.  S6nyaand  Natasha.  Nicholassings.The

Daniel  Cooper  35

21.  At  Count  Bczukhov's.  Prince  Vasfli  and

Catiche  37

22-23.  Anna  Mikhdylovna  and  Pierre  at  Count

Bczukhov's  41

24.  Anna  Mikhdylovna  and  Catiche  strug-

gle for  the  inlaid  portfolio  45

25.  Bald  Hills.   Prince  N.  A.  Bolkonski.

Princess  Mary's  correspondence  with

Julie  Kardgina  47

26-27.  Prince  Andrew  at  Bald  Hills  51

28.  Prince  Andrew  leaves  to  join  the  army.

Princess  Mary  gives  him  an  icon    55

BOOK  TWO

1-2.  Review  near  Braunau.  Zherk6v  and
D61okhov  60

3.  Kutuzov  and  an  Austrian  general. ^Le

malheureux  Mack.  Zherk6v's  fool-
ery 65

4.  Nicholas  and  Denisov.  Telydnin  and

the  missing  purse  68

5.  Nicholas  in  trouble  with  his  fellow  of-

ficers 72

6-8.  Crossing  the  Enns.  Burning  the  bridge.

Rost6v's  baptism  of  fire  74

9.  Prince  Andrew  sent  with  dispatches  to

the  Austrian  court.  The  Minister  of

War  81


10.  Prince(Andrew  and  Billbin  83

1 1.  Hippolyte  Kuragin  and  les  ndtres     86

12.  Prince  Andrew  received  by  the  Emper-

or Francis.  Bilibin's  story  of  the  Tha-
bor  Bridge  87

13-14.  Prince  Andrew  returns  to  Kutuzov.
Bagrati6n  sent  to  Hollabriinn.
Napoleon's  letter  to  Murat  89

15.  Prince  Andrew  reports  to  Bagrati6n.

Captain  Tiishin.  Soldiers  at  the  front.
D61okhov  talks  to  a  French  grena-
dier 94

16.  Prince  Andrew  surveys  the  position.

The  first  shot  96

17.  Bagration  in  action.  Tiishin's  battery.

Setting  Schon  Grabern  on  fire        97
18-19.  Battle  scenes.  Quarrelsome  command-
ers. Nicholas  injured  99

20.  Panic.  Timokhirfs  counterattack.  D6-

lokhov's  insistence. Tiishin's  battery.
Prince  Andrew  sent  to  order  him  to
retreat  104

2 1 .  Withdrawal  of  the  forces.  Nicholas  rides

on  a  gun  carriage.  Tiishin  called  to
account  by  Bagrati6n.  Prince  Andrew
defends  him.  Nicholas'  depression

106

BOOK  THREE

1-2.  Prince  Vasfli  and  Pierre.  A  soiree  at
AnnaPa vlovna's.  IMene'sname  day.
Pierre's  marriage  1 1 1

3.  Prince  Vasili  and  Anatole  visit  Prince

N.  A.  Bolkonski.  Princess  Mary's  ap-
pearance 119

4.  Lise,  Mademoiselle  Bourienne,  Mary,

Anatole,  and  old  Bolkonski          122

5.  Her    father's    opposition    to    Mary's

marrying.  She  finds  Mademoiselle
Bourienne  and  Anatole  in  the  con-
servatory; declines  marriage  126

6.  A  letter  from  Nicholas.  S6nya  and  Na-

tasha 128

7.  Nicholas  visits  Boris  and  Berg  in  camp.

Nicholas  tells  of  Schon  Grabern.  His
encounter  with  Prince  Andrew  131

8.  The  Emperor  reviews  the  army.  En-

thusiasm of  Nicholas  135

9.  Boris  visits  Prince  Andrew; at  Olimitz.

Prince  Dolgoriikov  137


vn


V1U


CONTENTS


10.  Nicholas  not  in  the  action  at  Wischau.

The  Emperor.  Nicholas'  devotion  to
him  140

11.  Preparations  for  action.  Dolgorukov's

opinion  of  Napoleon  and  of  his  posi-
tion. Kutuzov's  depression  142

1 2.  The  Council  of  War.  Weyrother's  plans.

Kutiizov  sleeps.  Prince  Andrew's  re-
flections 144

13.  Rost6v  at  the  front.  Visit  of  Bagrati6n

and  Dolgonikov.  Rost6v  sent  to  rec-
onnoiter.  Napoleon's  proclamation

M7

14-19.  Battle  of  Austerlitz.  Prince  Andrew
badly  wounded  150

BOOK  FOUR

1.  Nicholas  home  on  leave  165

2.  Preparations  for  Club  dinner  168

3.  The  dinner.   Bagration   as  guest  of

honor  1 7 1

4.  Pierre  challenges  D61okhov  173

5.  The  duel  176

6.  Pierre's  separation  from  H£lene      177

7.  Andrew  considered  dead  1 79

8.  Lise's  confinement.  Andrew  arrives  180

9.  Death  of  Lise  182

10.  Denfsov  and  D61okhov  at  the  Rost6vs'

•83

11.  S6nya  declines   D61okhov's  proposal

12.  logel's  ball.  Denfsov's  mazurka         186
13-14.  Nicholas  loses  43,000  rubles  to  D61ok-

hov  188

15.  Nicholas  at  home.  Natdsha  sings      190

16.  Nicholas  tells  his  father  of  his  losses.

Denfsov  proposes  to  Natdsha      192

BOOK  FIVE

1-2.  Pierre  meets  Bazde"ev  194

3-4.  Pierre  becomes  a  Freemason  198

5.  Pierre  repulses  Prince  Vasfli  203

6.  A  soiree  at  Anna  Pdvlovna's.  H£lene

takes  up  Borfs  204

7.  Hippolyte  at  Anna  Pdvlovna's        206

8.  Old  Bolk6nski  as  commander  in  chief

of  the  conscription.  Andrew's  anx-
iety. A  letter  from  his  father        206

9.  Bilfbin's  letter  about  the  campaign.

The  baby  convalescent  208

10.  Pierre  goes  to  Kiev  and  visits  his  estates.

Obstacles  to  the  emancipation  of  his
serfs  211

11.  Pierre  visits  Prince  Andrew  213

12.  Pierre's  and  Prince  Andrew's  talk  on

the  ferry  raft  216


13.  "God's  folk"  at  Bald  Hills  218

14.  Old  Bolk6nski  and  Pierre  220

15.  Nicholas  rejoins  his  regiment.  Shortage

of  provisions  221

16.  Denfsov  seizes  transports  of  food,  gets

into  trouble,  is  wounded  223

17-18.  Nicholas  visits  Denfsov  in  hospital  225

19.  Borfs  at  Tilsit.  Nicholas'  inopportune

visit  228

20.  Nicholas  tries  to  present  Denfsov's  peti-

tion at  the  Emperor's  residence,  but
fails  230

21.  Napoleon  and    Alexander    as    allies.

Perplexity  of  Nicholas.  "Another
bottle"  232

BOOK  SIX

1-3.  Prince  Andrew's  occupations  at  Bogu-
charovo.  His  drive  through  the  for-
est—the bare  oak.  His  visit  to  the  Ros-
t6vs  at  Otrddnoe.  Overhears  Natd-
sha's talk  with  S6nya.  Return  through
the  forest— the  oak  in  leaf.  He  de-
cides to  go  to  Petersburg  235

4-6.  Sperdnski,  Arakcheev,  and  Prince  An-
drew 238

7-8.  Pierre  and  the  Petersburg  Freemasons.
He  visits  Joseph  Alex^evich.  Recon-
ciliation with  H^lene  243
9.  H^lene's  social  success.  Her  salon  and
relations  with  Borfs  247

10.  Pierre's  diary  248

11.  The    Rost6vs    in    Petersburg.    Berg

engaged  to  Vera  and  demands  her
dowry  250

12.  Natdsha  and  Borfs  251

13.  Natdsha's    bedtime    talks    with    her

mother  252

14-17.  Natdsha's  first  grand  ball.  She  dances
with  Prince  Andrew  254

18.  Bitski  calls  on  Prince  Andrew.  Dinner
at  Sperdnski's.  Prince  Andrew's  dis-
illusionment with  him  and  his  re-
forms 260
49.  Prince  Andrew  calls  on  the  Rost6vs.
Natdsha's  effect  on  him  262
20-21.  The  Bergs'  evening  party  263

22.  Natdsha  consults  her  mother.  Prince

Andrew  confides  in  Pierre  265

23.  Prince  N.  Bolk6nski  insists  on  post-

ponement of  his  son's  marriage.  Na-
tdsha's distress  at  Prince  Andrew's
absence.  He  returns  and  they  become
engaged  267

24.  Prince  Andrew's  last  days  with  Na-

tdsha 270


CONTENTS


25.  Prince  N.  Bolk6nski's  treatment  of

Mary.  Her  letter  to  Julie  Kirdgina

271

26.  Prince  N.  Bolk6nski  threatens  to  marry

Mile  Bourienne  273

BOOK  SEVEN

1.  Nicholas  Rost6v  returns  home  on  leave.

His  doubts  about  Natasha's  engagement

275

2.  Nicholas  settles  accounts  with  Mftenka

277

3.  Nicholas  decides  to  go  hunting  278

4.  The  wolf  hunt  begins  279

5.  The  wolf  is  taken  281

6.  The  fox  hunt  and  the  huntsmen's  quarrel.

Ildgin's  courtesy.  Chasing  a  hare.  Ru-
gdy's  triumph  284

7.  An  evening  at  "Uncle's."  The  balaldyka.

Natasha's  Russian  dance  287

8.  His  mother  urges  Nicholas  to  marry  Julie

Karagina,  and  grumbles  at  S6nya      291

9.  Christmas   at  Otradnoe.   Natasha  is  de-

pressed and  capricious  292

10.  Nicholas,  Natasha,  and  S6nya  indulge  in

recollections.  Dimmlcr  plays  and  Nata-
sha sings.  The  maskers.  A  troyka  drive  to
the  Melyuk6vs'  294

11.  At  Melyuk6vka.  Sonya  goes  to  the  barn  to

try  her  fortune  298

12.  The  drive  home.  Natasha  and  S6nya  try

the  future  with  looking  glasses  300

13.  His  mother  opposes   Nicholas'   wish   to

marry  S6nya,  and  he  returns  to  his  regi-
ment. Natasha  becomes  restless  and  im-
patient for  Prince  Andrew's  return  301

BOOK  EIGHT

1.  Pierre's  life  in  Moscow.  Asks  himself  "What

for?"  and  "Why?"  303

2.  Prince  N.  Bolk6nski  in  Moscow.  His  harsh

treatment  of  Princess  Mary.  She  teaches
little  Nicholas.  The  old  prince  and  Mile
Bourienne  305

3.  Dr.  Mdtivier  treated  as  a  spy  by  the  old

prince.  The  dinner  on  the  prince's  name
day  307

4.  Pierre  and  Princess  Mary  discuss  Boris  and

Natdsha  309

5.  Boris  and  Julie.  Their  melancholy.  Boris

proposes  and  is  accepted  3 1 1

6.  Count  IlydRost6v,Natdsha,andS6nyastay

with  Mdrya  Dmftrievna  in  Moscow   313

7.  Count  Rost6v  and  Natdsha  call  on  Prince

N.  Bolk6nski.They  are  received  by  Prin-
cess Mary.  Prince  Bolk6nski's  strange


•    ix

behavior.  Mary  and  Natisha  dislike  one
another  314

8.  The  Rost6vs  at  the  Opera.  H£l£ne  in  the

next  box  316

9.  The  Opera  described.  Anatole  and  Pierre

arrive.  Natdsha  makes  H£l£ne's  ac-
quaintance. Duport  dances  318

10.  Hdtene  presents  Anatole  to  Natdsha.  He

courts  her  320

11.  Anatole  and  D61okhov  in  Moscow       321

12.  Sunday  at  Mdrya  Dmftrievna's.  H£l£ne

calls  and  invites  the  Rost6vs  to  hear  Mile
George  recite.  She  tells  Natdsha  that
Anatole  is  in  love  with  her  322

13.  The  reception  at  H£l£ne's.  Mile  George.

Anatole  dances  with  Natdsha  and  makes
love  to  her.  Her  perplexity  as  to  her
own  feelings  324

14.  Princess  Mary's  letter  to  Natdsha,  who  also

receives  one  from  Anatole  325

15.  S6nya  finds  Anatole's  letter  and  remon-

strates with  Natdsha,  who  writes  to  Prin-
cess Mary  breaking  off  her  engagement
with  Prince  Andrew.  A  party  at  the
Kardgins'.  Anatole  meets  Natdsha.  She
is  angry  with  S6nya,  who  resolves  to  pre-
vent her  elopement  327

16.  Anatole  at  Dolokhov's.  Balagd  329

17.  Anatole  sets  off  to  abduct  Natdsha,  but  en-

counters Mdrya  Dmftrievna's  footman

332

18.  Mdrya   Dmitrievna  reproaches  Natdsha.

Count  Ilyd  Rost6v  is  kept  in  ignorance

333

19.  Pierre  at  Mdrya  Dmftrievna's.  He  tells  Na-

tdsha that  Anatole  is  married  334

20.  Pierre's  explanation  with  Anatole        336

21.  Natdsha  tries  to  poison  herself.  Prince  An-

drew returns  to  Moscow  and  Pierre  talks
to  him  337

22.  Pierre  and  Natdsha.  He  tells  her  of  his  de-

votion. The  great  comet  of  1812       339

BOOK  NINE

1.  The  year  1812.  Rulers  and  generals  are

"history's  slaves"  342

2.  Napoleon  crosses  the  Niemen  and  sees

Polish  Uhlans  drowned  swimming  the
Vfliya  344

3.  Alexander  I  at  Vflna.  The  ball  at  Count

Bennigsen's.  Borfs  overhears  the  Em-
peror speaking  to  Balashev  and  learns
that  the  French  have  crossed  the  fron-
tier. Alexander's  letter  to  Napole6n  346

4.  Balashev's  mission  to  Napoleon,  He  meets

Murat,  "the  King  of  Naples"  347


CONTENTS


5.  Balashev  taken  to  Davout,  who  treats  him

badly,  but  he  is  at  last  presented  to  Na-
poleon in  Vilna  349

6.  Balashe'v's  interview  with  Napoleon     350

7.  Balashev  dines  with  Napoleon  354

8.  Prince  Andrew  on  Kutiizov's  staff  in  Mol-

davia. He  is  sent  to  Barclay's  army.  Visits
Bald  Hills.  His  talks  with  his  father  and
Princess  Mary  355

9.  Prince  Andrew  in  the  army  at  Drissa.  Eight

conflicting  parties  358

10.  Prince  Andrew  is  introduced  to  Pfuel  361

1 1.  An  informal  Council  of  War.  Pfuel's  dog-

matism 363

it.  Nicholas  writes  to  Sdnya.  He  and  Ilyin  in

a  storm  365

13.  Mary  Hendrfkhovna.  The  officers  and  the

doctor  367

14.  Courage.  Rost6v  goes  into  action  at  Ostr6-

vna  369

15.  Rost6v's  hussars  charge  the  French  dra-

goons. He  wounds  and  captures*  a  pris-
oner 370

16.  Natasha's  illness.  The  use  of  doctors    372

1 7.  Natasha  and  Pierre.  She  prepares  for  com-

munion with  Bel6va.  The  church  serv-
ice. Her  health  improves  373

18.  Natasha  attends  Mass  and  hears  the  spe-

cial prayer  for  victory  374

19.  Pierre's  relation  to  life  altered  by  his  feel-

ing for  Natasha.  666.  Napoleon  as  Anti-
christ. Pierre's  belief  that  he  is  destined
to  end  Napoleon's  power.  He  gets  news
for  the  Rost6vs  377

10.  Pierre  at  the  Rost6vs'.  Natasha  again  takes
up  her  singing.  S6nya  reads  Alexander's
manifesto.  Pe"tya  declares  that  he  will
enter  the  army.  Natasha  realizes  that
Pierre  loves  her.  He  decides  to  cease  go-
ing to  the  Rostovs'  379

at.  Pe"tya  goes  to  the  Kremlin  to  see  the  Em-
peror. He  gets  crushed.  He  secures  a  bis-
cuit thrown  by  the  Emperor  after  din-
ner 382

22.  Assembly  of  gentry  and  merchants  at  the

Sloboda  Palace.  A  limited  discussion.
Pierre's  part  in  it  384

23.  Count  Rostopchfn's  remarks.  The  offer

made  by  the  Moscow  nobility  and  gen-
try. The  Emperor's  speech.  Pierre  offers
to  supply  and  maintain  a  thousand  men

387

BOOK  TEN

i.  Reflections  on  the  campaign  of  1812.  The
course  of  events  was  fortuitous  and  un-
foreseen by  either  side  389


2.  Prince  N.  Bolk6nski  and  his  daughter.  His

fcreak  with  Mile  Bourienne.  Mary's  cor-
respondence with  Julie.  The  old  prince
receives  a  letter  from  Prince  Andrew
but  does  not  grasp  its  meaning  and  con-
fuses the  present  invasion  with  the  Pol-
ish campaign  of  1807  391

3.  The  old  prince  sends  Alpdtych  to  Smolensk

with  various  commissions,  and  does  not
know  where  to  have  his  bed  placed.  He
remembers  Prince  Andrew's  letter  and
reads  and  understands  it  393

4.  Princess  Mary  sends  a  letter  to  the  Gover-

nor at  Smolensk.  Alpdtych  sets  off  on
August  4;  reaches  Smolensk  that  eve-
ning and  stays  at  Ferapontov's  inn.  Fir-
ing heard  outside  the  town.  Next  day  he
does  his  business,  but  finds  alarm  spread-
ing, and  is  advised  by  the  Governor  that
the  Bolkonskis  had  better  go  to  Mos-
cow. The  town  bombarded.  Ferap6ntov's
cook  has  her  thigh  broken  by  a  shell.
Retreating  soldiers  loot  Ferapontov's
shop  and  he  declares  he  will  set  his
place  on  fire  himself  and  not  leave  it
to  the  French.  Alpatych  meets  Prince
Andrew,  who  has  an  encounter  with
Berg  395

5.  Prince  Andrew  passing  Bald  Hills  with  his

regiment.  The  retreat:  heat  and  terrible
dust.  He  rides  over  to  the  house.  The
little  girls  and  the  plums.  The  soldiers
bathe  in  a  pond.  "Cannon  fodder."  Ba-
gration's  letter  to  Arakche'ev  399

6.  Matter  and  form.  Anna  Pdvlovna's  and

He*lene's  rival  salons.  Prince  Vasfli's
opinion  of  Kutiizov  403

7.  Napoleon  orders  an  advance  on  Moscow.

Napoleon's  conversation  with  Lavrush-
ka  405

8.  Prince  Nicholas  Bolkonski  has  a  paralytic

stroke  and  is  taken  to  Bogucharovo.
Princess  Mary  decides  that  they  must
move  on  to  Moscow.  Her  last  interview
with  her  father.  His  affection  for  her.
His  death  406

9.  Character  of  the  Bogucharovo  peasantry

and  the  baffling  undercurrents  in  the
life  of  the  Russian  people.  The  village
Elder,  Dron.  Alpatych  talks  to  him.  The
peasants  decide  not  to  supply  horses  or
carts  410

10.  Mile  Bourienne  advises  Princess  Mary  to

appeal  to  the  French  for  protection.
Princess  Mary  speaks  to  Dron  412

1 1 .  Princess  Mary  addresses  the  peasants.  They


CONTENTS


distrust  her  and  refuse  to  leave  Bogucha-

rovo  f       415

i  a.  Princess  Mary  at  night  recalls  her  last  sight

of  her  father  4 1 6

13.  Nicholas  and  Ilyfn  ride  to  Bogucharovo.

They  are  asked  by  Alpatych  to  protect
the  princess.  Nicholas  makes  her  ac-
quaintance and  places  himself  at  her
service  417

14.  Nicholas  calls  the  peasants  to  account  and

intimidates  them.  Carts  and  horses  are
provided  for  Princess  Mary's  departure.
Princess  Mary  feels  that  she  loves  him

419

15.  Prince  Andrew  goes  to  headquarters  and

meets  Denfsov,  who  wants  guerrilla
troops  to  break  the  French  line  of
communication.  Kutuzov's  reception  of
them.  He  transacts  business  421

16.  The  priest's  wife  offers  Kutuzov  "bread

and  salt."  He  has  a  further  talk  with
Prince  Andrew,  who  declines  a  place  on
the  staff.  Patience  and  Time.  Prince  An-
drew's confidence  in  Kutuzov  424

17.  Moscow  after  the  Emperor's  visit.  Rostop-

chin's  broadsheets.  Julie's  farewell  wi-
re" c.  Forfeits  for  speaking  French.  Pierre
hears  of  Princess  Mary's  arrival  in  Mos-
cow 426

18.  Rostopchm's  broadsheets.  Pierre  and  the

eldest  princess.  Leppich's  balloon.  A
public  flogging.  Pierre  leaves  Moscow
for  the  army  428

19.  Senselessness  of  the  battle  of  Borodin6,

and  erroneousness  of  the  historians'  ac-
counts of  it.  Where  and  how  it  was  fought

43°

20.  Pierre  encounters  cavalry  advancing  and

carts  of  wounded  retiring.  He  talks  to
an  army  doctor.  Pierre  looks  for  the
"position"  occupied  by  the  army.  Peas-
ant militia  digging  entrenchments  432

21.  Pierre  ascends  a  knoll  at  G6rki,  surveys

the  scene,  and  inquires  as  to  the  "posi-
tion" occupied*  A  procession  carrying
the  "Smolensk  Mother  of  God."  The
reverence  of  the  crowd  and  of  Kutuzov

434

22.  Boris  meets  Pierre.  Dolokhov  makes  his

way  to  Kutuzov.  Kutuzov  notices  Pierre.
D61okhov  asks  Pierre  to  be  reconciled

436

23.  Pierre  rides  to  the  left  flank  with  Bennig-

sen,  who  explains  the  "position"  in  a  way
Pierre  does  not  understand  and  changes
one  of  Kutiizov's  dispositions  438


•     xi

24.  Prince  Andrew's  reflections  on  life  and

death.  Pierre  comes  to  see  him         439

25.  Tim6khin's  opinion  of  Kutuzov.  Prince

Andrew  on  Barclay  de  Tolly.  War  and
chess.  The  spirit  of  the  army.  Wolzogen
and  Clausewitz.  "The  war  must  be  ex-
tended widely."  Pierre  understands  the
importance  of  this  war.  "Not  take  pris-
oners." What  is  war?  Prince  Andrew
thinks  of  Natlsha  440

26.  De  Beausset  brings  a  portrait  of  the  "King

of  Rome"  to  Napoleon.  Napoleon's
proclamation  444

27.  Napoleon's  dispositions  for  the  battle  of

Borodin6.  They  were  not  carried  out

445

28.  Napoleon's  cold.  Why  the  battle  had  to  be

fought  447

29.  Napoleon's  talk  to  de  Beausset  and  Rapp.

The  game  begins  448

30.  Pierre  views  the  battlefield  from  the  knoll

at  Gorki  450

31.  Pierre  at  the  Borodin6  bridge.  Under  fire.

Goes  to  Ra£vski's  Redoubt.  His  horse
wounded  under  him.  The  Ra£vski  Re-
doubt. The  young  officer.  Pierre  is  ac-
cepted at  the  redoubt  as  one  of  the  fam-
ily. The  flame  of  hidden  fire  in  th«  men's
souls.  Shortage  of  ammunition.  Pierre
sees  ammunition  wagons  blown  up  451

32.  The  redoubt  captured  by   the  French.

Pierre's  conflict  with  a  French  officer.
The  redoubt  retaken  by  the  Russian*

455

33.  The  course  of  the  battle.  Difficulty  of  dis-

cerning what  was  going  on.  Things  take
their  own  course  apart  from  the  orders
issued  456

34.  Reinforcements.  Belliard  appeals  to  Na-

poleon. De  Beausset  proposes  breakfast.
Friant's  division  sent  in  support.  The
expected  success  not  secured.  Continu-
ous and  useless  slaughter  457

35.  Kutuzov.  His  rebuke  to  Wolzogen.  An  or-

der of  the  day  for  an  attack  tomorrow.
The  spirit  of  the  army  459

36.  Prince  Andrew  with  the  reserve  under  fire.

Hit  by  a  bursting  shell.  Outside  the
dressing  station  461

37.  The  operating  tent.  Portion  of  Prince  An-

drew's thighbone  extracted.  Anatole's
leg  amputated.  Prince  Andrew  pities
him  464

38.  Napoleon  is  depressed.  His  mini  and  con-

science darkened.  His  calculation  that
few  Frenchmen  perished  in  Russia  465


xii


CONTENTS


39.  Appearance  of  the  field  at  the  end  of  the
battle.  Doubts  maturing  in  every  soul.
Only  a  little  further  effort  needed  to
secure  victory,  but  such  effort  impossi-
ble. Could  Napoleon  have  used  his  Old
Guard?  The  Russians  had  gained  a  mor-
al victory  467

BOOK  ELEVEN

1.  Continuity  of  motion.  Achilles  and  the

tortoise.  The  method  of  history;  its
explanation  of  events  compared  with
explanations  of  the  movement  of  a
locomotive  469

2.  Summary  of  campaign   before  Boro-

dino and  explanation  of  Kutuzov's
subsequent  movements  470

3-4.  Kutuzov  and  his  generals  at  Pokl6nny
Hill.  Council  of  War  at  Fill  472

5.  The  author's  reflections  on  the  aban-
donment of  Moscow.  Rostopchin's
conduct  and  that  of  private  individ-
uals 475

6-7.  Helene  in  Petersburg.  Conversion  to
I  Catholicism  and  plans  for  remar-

riage 476

8-9.  Pierre  walks  to  Mozhdysk.  His  night
lodging  there.  His  dream,  and  his
return  to  Moscow  480

10-11.  Pierre  at  Rostopchin's.  The  affair  of
Klyucharcv  and  Vercshchagin.  Pierre
leaves  home  secretly  482

12-17.  The  Rost6vs:  packing  up  and  leaving
Moscow.  They  allow  wounded  offi-
cers to  stay  in  their  house  and  avail
themselves  of  their  carts  to  leave
Moscow.  Berg's  wish  to  borrow  a
cart.  Natasha  when  leaving  Moscow
sees  and  speaks  to  Pierre.  Prince  An-
drew travels  in  their  train  of  vehicles

485

18.  Pierre  at  Bazd^ev's  house.  He  wears  a

coachman's  coat  496

19.  Napoleon  surveys  Moscow  from  Pok-

16nny  Hill.  He  awaits  a  deputation
of  les  boyars  497

20-23.  Moscow  compared  to  a  queenless  hive.
The  army's  departure.  Looting  by
Russian  soldiers.  The  Moskvd  bridge
blocked,  and  cleared  by  Erm61ov.  A
brawl  among  workmen.  Reading  a
Rostopchfn  broadsheet  to  a  crowd.
Scene  with  the  superintendent  of
police  499

24-25.  Rostopchfn.  The  killing  of  Vereshcha-
gin.  The  released  lunatics.  Rostop-


chfn's  encounterwith  Kutuzov  at  the
'  bridge  505

26.  The  French  enter  Moscow.  Shots  from
the  Kremlin  gate.  The  Fire  of  Mos-
cow discussed  511

27-29.  Pierre:  his  plan  to  kill  Napoleon.  Baz-
de*ev's  drunken  brother  fires  at  Cap-
tain Ramballe,  who  regards  Pierre
as  a  friend  513

30-32.  The  Rost6vs  at  My  tfshchi.  Natasha  sees
Prince  Andrew  521

33-34.  Pierre  sets  out  to  meet  Napoleon.  He
saves  a  child,  defends  an  Armenian
girl  from  a  French  soldier,  and  is  ar-
rested as  an  incendiary  527

BOOK  TWELVE

1-3.  Anna  PAvlovria's  soiree.  Talk  of  H£-
lene's  illness.  The  Bishop's  letter.
Victory  at  Borodino  reported.  Death
of  Helene.  News  of  abandonment  of
Moscow.  Michaud's  report  533

4-8.  Nicholas  sent  to  Voronezh.  An  evening
at  the  Governor's.  Nicholas  and
Princess  Mary.  A  letter  from  Sonya

537

9-13.  Pierre's  treatment  as  a  prisoner.  He  is
questioned  by  Davout.  Shooting  of
prisoners.  Platon  Karataev  547
14-16.  Princess  Mary  goes  to  the  Rost6vs'  in
Yaroslavl.  Prince  Andrew's  last  days
and  death  555

BOOK  THIRTEEN
1-7.  The  cause  of  historical  events.  A  sur-
vey of  movements  of  the  Russian
army  after  leaving  Moscow.  Napo-
leon's letter  to  Kutuzov.  The  camp
at  Tarutino.  Alexander's  letters  to
Kutuzov.  Ermolov  and  others  absent
when  wanted. The  battle  postponed.
Kutuzov's  wrath.  The  action  next
day.  Cossacks  surprise  Murat's  army
and  capture  prisoners,  guns,  and
booty.  Inactivity  of  the  rest  of  the
army  563

8-10.  Napoleon's  measures.  Proclamation  in
Moscow.  Effects  of  pillage  on  French
discipline  571

11-14.  Pierre:  four  weeks  in  captivity.  Kara-
taev and  a  French  soldier.  The  French
leave  Moscow.  The  drum.  Pierre's
mental  change;  he  recovers  his  grip
on  life.  Exit  of  troops  and  prisoners.
The  road  blocked.  Pierre's  reflec-
tions 575


CONTENTS

15-19.  The  Russian  army.  Dokhtiirov.  News
of  the  French  having  left  Moscow
reaches  Kutiizov  at  night.  His  emo-  13-81.
tion.  Cossacks  nearly  capture  Napo-
leon at  Malo-Yarosldvets.  He  retreats
by  the  Smolensk  road.  A  third  of  his
army  melts  away  before  reaching  Vy-
£zma  582


BOOK  FOURTEEN

1-2.  National  character  of  the  war.  A  duel-

ist who  drops  his  rapier  and  seizes  a

cudgel.  Guerrilla  warfare.  The  spirit

of  the  army  588

3-11.  The  partisans  or  guerrillas.    Denfsov,

D61okhov,  P(hya  Rost6v,  and  Tik-

hon.  A  French  drummer  boy.  A  visit

to  the  enemy's  camp.  Attack  on  a

French  convoy.  The  death  of  P£tya

59«

12-15.  Pierre's  journey  among  the  prisoners.

Karatjiev.  His  story  of  the  merchant.

His  death.   Pierre  rescued  604

16-18.  The  French  retreat.  Berthier's  report

to  Napoleon.    Their  flight  beyond

Smolensk  609

19.  Why  the  French  were  not  cut  off  by

the  Russians  611


1-3.


4-5.


BOOK  FIFTEEN

TheRostovs.  Natasha's  grief.  The  news
of  Ptftya's  death.  Natdsha  leaves  with
Princess  Mary  for  Moscow  614

Analysis  of  Kutiizov's  movements  618
6~g.  Kutiizov  at  Krdsnoe;  his  speech  to  the
army.  Encampment  for  the  night:
soldier  scenes.  Ramballe's  appear-
ance with  his  orderly.  The  song  of
Henri  Quatre.  621

10-12.  The  crossing  of  the  Berezina.  Vflna.


1-4.


5-9-


*    xiii

The  Emperor  Alexander.  Kutiizov;
his  failing  health  626

Pierre.  Illness  and  recovery  at  Orel.
His  new  attitude  to  life  and  his  fel-
low men.  His  affairs.  He  goes  to  Mos-
cow; the  town's  animation  and  rapid
recovery.  Pierre  meets  Natdsha  at
Princess  Mary's.  Love  631

FIRST  EPILOGUE
Discussion  of  forces  operating  in  his-
tory. Chance  and  genius.  The  ideals
of  glory  and  grandeur.  Alexander's
renunciation  of  power.  The  purpose
of  a  bee  645

Death  of  old  Count  Rost6v.  Nicholas
in  retirement.  His  mother.  His  meet-
ing with  Princess  Mary.  Their  wed-
ding; estate  management  in  the  coun-
try; their  family  life.  S6nya  a  sterile
flower.  Denfsov.'  Nicholas'  name  day

650

10-14.  Natdsha's  and  Pierre's  family  life.  His
return  after  a  visit  to  Petersburg.  The
old  countess  in  decay.  Conversation
about  social  tendencies,  and  indigna-
tion at  reactionary  trend  of  the  gov-
ernment. Views  of  Pierre  and  Nich-
olas 659

15-16.  The  two  married  couples  and  their
mutual  relations.  Natasha's  jealousy.
Young  Nicholas  Boik6nski's  aspira-
tions 669

SECOND  EPILOGUE
1-12.  A  general  discussion  on  the  historians'
study  of  human  life,  and  on  the  diffi-
culty of  defining  the  forces  that  move
nations.  The  problem  of  free  will
and  necessity  675


MAPS

I.  Battle  of  Austerlitz  697

II.  War  of  1805  697

III.  Advance  and  Retreat  of  Napoleon,  1812     698  8c  699

IV.  Borodin6  698
V.  Moscow  699


THE  PRINCIPAL  CHARACTERS  ARRANGED
IN  FAMILY  GROUPS


THE  BEZUKHOVS

Count  Cyril  Bezukhov,  a  wealthy  nobleman  of  Catherine  the  Great's  time
Pierre,  his  son,  who,  legitimized  after  his  father's  death,  becomes  Count

Bezukhov— //*£  central  character  of  the  novel.
Princess  Caliche,  Pierre's  cousin

THE  RosT6vs

Count  Ilyd  Rost6v,  a  wealthy  nobleman

Countess  Nataly  Rost6va,  his  wife

Count  Nicholas  Rostov,  their  elder  son,  who  goes  into  the  army  as  a  cadet

Count  Peter  (Pdtya)  Rostov,  their  younger  son

Countess  Ve"ra  Rost6va,  their  elder  daughter

Countess  Nataly  (Natdsha)  Rost6va,  their  younger  daughter,  the  central

female  character

S6nya,  a  poor  niece  of  the  Rostovs
Lieutenant  Alphonse  Kdrlovich  Berg,  an  officer  who  marries  V&ra

THE  BoLK6NSKis

Prince  Nicholas  Andre*evich  Bolk6nski,  a  retired  general

Prince  Andrew  Bolk6nski,  his  son,  a  member  of  Kutuzov's  staff

Princess  Mary  Bolk6nskaya,  his  daughter

Princess  Elisabeth   (Lise)  Bolkonskaya,  Prince  Andrew's  wife,  "the  most

fascinating  woman  in  Petersburg"
Prince  Nicholas  (Koko)  Andrd-evich  Bolk6nski,  Prince  Andrew's  son

THE  KURAGINS

Prince  Vasfli  Kurdgin,  an  elderly  nobleman

Prince  Hippolyte  Kurdgin,  his  weak-minded  elder  son

Prince  Anatole  Kurdgin,  his  profligate  younger  son

Princess  Hdlene  Kunigina,  his  daughter,  "the  beautiful  Helene"

THE  DRUBETSK6YS

Princess  Anna  Mikhdylovna  Drubetskdya,  an  impoverished  noblewoman
Prince  Boris  (B6ry)  Drubetskoy,  her  son,  who  enters  the  army
Julie  Kardgina,  an  heiress  t  who  later  marries  Boris


XV


DATES  OF  PRINCIPAL  HISTORICAL  EVENTS


1805


1807


1812


o.  s.
Oct.  11

Oct.  23
Oct.  24
Oct.  28
Oct.  30

Nov.  4
Nov.  4
Noy.  19
Nov.  20


May  17
June  12
June  14
July  13
Aug.  4
Aug.  5
Aug.  7

Aug.  8
Aug.  10
Aug.  17

Aug.  17
Aug.  24
Aug.  26
Sept.  i
Oct.  6

°C*  ft  7'
and  8

Oct.  12
Oct.  21
Oct.  28-
Nov.  2
Nov.  4-8
Nov.  9
Nov.  i4
Nov.  23
Dec.  6


N.  s.
Oct.  23

Nov.  4
Nov.  5
Nov.  9
Nov.  11
Nov.  16
Nov.  16
Dec.  i
Dec.  2


Jan.  27       Feb.  8
June  2        June  14
June  13      June  25


May  29
June  24
June  26
July  25
Aug.  16
Aug.  17
Aug.  19

Aug.  20
Aug.  22
Aug.  29

Aug.  29
Sept.  5
Sept.  7
Sept.  13
Oct.  18


Kutuzov  inspects  regiment  near  Braunau.  Lc

malheureux  Mack  arrives
The  Russian  army  crosses  the  Enns
Fight  at  Amstetten

The  Russian  army  crosses  the  Danube
Defeats  Mortier  at  Durrenstein
Napoleon  writes  to  Murat  from  Schonbrunn
Battle  of  Schon  Grabern
The  Council  of  War  at  Ostralitz
Battle  of  Austerlitz

Battle  of  Preussisch-Eylau

Battle  of  Friedland

The  Emperors  meet  at  Tilsit

Napoleon  leaves  Dresden

Napoleon  crosses  the  Niemen  and  enters  Russia

Alexander  sends  Balashev  to  Napoleon

The  Pavlograd  hussars  in  action  at  Ostr6vna

Alpatych  at  Smolensk  hears  distant  firing

Bombardment  at  Smolensk

Prince  Nicholas  Bolk6nski  leaves  Bald  Hills  for

Bogucharovo

Kutuzov  appointed  Commander  in  Chief
Prince  Andrew's  column  abreast  of  Bald  Hills
Kutuzov  reaches  Tsarevo-Zaymfshche  and  takes

command  of  the  army
Nicholas  Rost6v  rides  to  Bogucharovo
Battle  of  the  Shevardino  Redoubt
Battle  of  Borodin6

Kutuzov  orders  retreat  through  Moscow
Battle  of  Tarutino


Battle  of  Malo-Yaroslavets
Cossacks  harry  the  French  at  Vyazma
t  SmoMnik


H

and  20

Oct.  24
Nov.  2
Nov.  9-
Nov.  14

Nov.  i6-2oBattles  at  Krasnoe
Nov.  21      Ney,  with  rearguard,  reaches  Orsh£
i6Nov.  26-28  Crossing  of  the  Berezina

Dec.  5        Napoleon  abandons  the  army  at  Smorg6ni
Dec.  18      He  reaches  Paris


XVI


Book  One:  1805


CHAPTER  I

WELL,  PRINCE,  so  Genoa  and  Lucca  are  now
just  family  estates  of  the  Buonapartes.  But  I
warn  you,  if  you  don't  tell  me  that  this  means
war,  if  you  still  try  to  defend  the  infamies  and
horrors  perpetrated  by  that  Antichrist— I  real-
ly believe  he  is  Antichrist— I  will  have  nothing
more  to  do  with  you  and  you  are  no  longer  my
friend,  no  longer  my  'faithful  slave,'  as  you
call  yourself!  But  how  do  you  do?  I  see  I  have
frightened  you— sit  down  and  tell  me  all  the
news."

It  was  in  July,  1805,  and  the  speaker  was  the
well-known  Anna  Pdvlovna  Sch^rer,  maid  of
honor  and  favorite  of  the  Empress  Marya  Fe-
dorovna.  With  these  words  she  greeted  Prince
Vasili  Kurdgin,  a  man  of  high  rank  and  impor-
tance, who  was  the  first  to  arrive  at  her  recep-
tion. Anna  Pdvlovna  had  had  a  cough  for  some
days.  She  was,  as  she  said,  suffering  from  la
grippe;  grippe  being  then  a  new  word  in  St.
Petersburg,  used  only  by  the  elite.

All  her  invitations  without  exception,  writ-
ten in  French,  and  delivered  by  a  scarlet-liver-
ied footman  that  morning,  ran  as  follows:

"If  you  have  nothing  better  to  do,  Count  [or
Prince],  and  if  the  prospect  of  spending  an
evening  with  a  poor  invalid  is  not  too  terrible,
I  shall  be  very  charmed  to  see  you  tonight  be-
tween 7  and  10— Annette  Sch^rer."

"Heavens!  what  a  virulent  attack!"  replied
the  prince,  not  in  the  least  disconcerted  by  this
reception.  He  had  just  entered,  wearing  an  em-
broidered court  uniform,  knee  breeches,  and
shoes,  and  had  stars  on  his  breast  and  a  serene
expression  on  his  flat  face.  He  spoke  in  that
refined  French  in  which  our  grandfathers  not
only  spoke  but  thought,  and  with  the  gentle,
patronizing  intonation  natural  to  a  man  of
importance  who  had  grown  old  in  society  and
at  court.  He  went  up  to  Anna  Pavlovna,  kissed
her  hand,  presenting  to  her  his  bald,  scented,
and  shining  head,  and  complacently  seated
himself  on  the  sofa.

"First  of  all,  dear  friend,  tell  me  how  you


are.  Set  your  friend's  mind  at  rest,"  said  he
without  altering  his  tone,  beneath  the  polite-
ness and  affected  sympathy  of  which  indiffer-
ence and  even  irony  could  be  discerned.

"Can  one  be  well  while  suffering  morally?
Can  one  be  calm  in  tirrfes  like  these  if  one  has
any  feeling?"  said  Anna  Pdvlovna.  "You  are
staying  the  whole  evening,  I  hope?"

"And  the  fete  at  the  English  ambassador's?
Today  is  Wednesday.  I  must  put  in  an  appear-
ance there,"  said  the  prince.  "My  daughter  is
coming  for  me  to  take  me  there."

"I  thought  today's  fete  had  been  canceled.
I  confess  all  these  festivities  and  fireworks  are
becoming  wearisome."

"If  they  had  known  that  you  wished  it,  the
entertainment  would  have  been  put  off,"  said
the  prince,  who,  like  a  wound-up  clock,  by
force  of  habit  said  things  he  did  not  even  wish
to  be  believed.

"Don't  tease!  Well,  and  what  has  been  de-
cided about  Novosiltsev's  dispatch?  You  know
everything."

"What  can  one  say  about  it?"  replied  the
prince  in  a  cold,  listless  tone.  "What  has  been
decided?  They  have  decided  that  Buonaparte
has  burnt  his  boats,  and  I  believe  that  we  are
ready  to  burn  ours."

Prince  Vastti  always  spoke  languidly,  like
an  actor  repeating  a  stale  part.  Anna  Pdvlovna
Scherer  on  the  contrary,  despite  her  forty  years,
overflowed  with  animation  and  impulsiveness.
To  be  an  enthusiast  had  become  her  social  vo-
cation and,  sometimes  even  when  she  did  not
feel  like  it,  she  became  enthusiastic  in  order
not  to  disappoint  the  expectations  of  those
who  knew  her.  The  subdued  smile  which,
though  it  did  not  suit  her  faded  features,  al-
ways played  round  her  lips  expressed,  as  in  a
spoiled  child,  a  continual  consciousness  of  her
charming  defect,  which  she  neither  wished,  nor
could,  nor  considered  it  necessary,  to  correct.

In  the  midst  of  a  conversation  on  political
matters  Anna  Pdvlovna  burst  out:

"Oh,  don't  speak  to  me  of  Austria.  Perhaps


WAR  AND  PEACE


I  don't  understand  things,  but  Austria  never
has  wished,  and  does  not  wish,  for  war.  She  is
betraying  us!  Russia  alone  must  save  Europe.
Our  gracious  sovereign  recognizes  his  high  vo-
cation and  will  be  true  to  it.  That  is  the  one
thing  I  have  faith  in!  Our  good  and  wonder-
ful sovereign  has  to  perfonn  the  noblest  role
on  earth,  and  he  is  so  virtuous  and  noble  that
God  will  not  forsake  him.  He  will  fulfill  his
vocation  and  crush  the  hydra  of  revolution,
which  has  become  more  terrible  than  ever  in
the  person  of  this  murderer  and  villain!  We
alone  must  avenge  the  blood  of  the  just  one.
. . .  Whom,  I  ask  you,  can  we  rely  on?  . . .  Eng-
land with  her  commercial  spirit  will  not  and
cannot  understand  the  Emperor  Alexander's
loftiness  of  soul.  She  tias  refused  to  evacuate
Malta.  She  wanted  to  find,  and  still  seeks,  some
secret  motive  in  our  actions.  What  answer  did
Novosiltsev  get?  None.  The  English  have  not
understood  and  cannot  understand  the  self-
abnegation  of  our  Emperor  who  wants  noth-
ing for  himself,  but  only  desires  the  good  of
mankind.  And  what  have  they  promised?  Noth-
ing! And  what  little  they  have  promised  they
will  not  perform!  Prussia  has  always  declared
that  Buonaparte  is  invincible  and  that  all
Europe  is  powerless  before  him.  .  .  .  And  I
don't  believe  a  word  that  Hardenburg  says,
or  Haugwitz  either.  This  famous  Prussian  neu-
trality is  just  a  trap.  I  have  faith  only  in  God
and  the  lofty  destiny  of  our  adored  monarch.
He  will  save  Europe!"

She  suddenly  paused,  smiling  at  her  own
impetuosity.

"I  think,"  said  the  prince  with  a  smile,  "that
if  you  had  been  sent  instead  of  our  dear
Wintzingerode  you  would  have  captured  the
King  of  Prussia's  consent  by  assault.  You  are
so  eloquent.  Will  you  give  me  a  cup  of  tea?"

"In  a  moment.  X  propos"she  added,  becom-
ing calm  again,  "I  am  expecting  two  very  in-
teresting men  tonight,  le  Vicomte  de  Morte-
mart,  who  is  connected  with  the  Montmoren-
cys  through  the  Rohans,oneof  the  best  French
families.  He  is  one  of  the  genuine  dmigrh,  the
good  ones.  And  also  the  Abbe*  Morio.  Do  you
know  that  profound  thinker?  He  has  been  re-
ceived by  the  Emperor.  Had  you  heard?"

"I  shall  be  delighted  to  meet  them,"  said  the
prince.  "But  tell  me,"  he  added  with  studied
carelessness  as  if  it  had  only  just  occurred  to
him,  though  the  question  he  was  about  to  ask
was  the  chief  motive  of  his  visit,  "is  it  true  that
the  Dowager  Empress  wants  Baron  Funke  to  be
appointed  first  secretary  at  Vienna?  The  baron


by  all  accounts  is  a  poor  creature."

Prince  Vasfli  wished  to  obtain  this  post  for
his  son,  but  others  were  trying  through  the
Dowager  Empress  Mdrya  Fedorovna  to  secure
it  for  the  baron.

Anna  Pdvlovna  almost  closed  her  eyes  to  in-
dicate that  neither  she  nor  anyone  else  had  a
right  to  criticize  what  the  Empress  desired  or
was  pleased  with.

"Baron  Funke  has  been  recommended  to  the
Dowager  Empress  by  her  sister,"  was  all  she
said,  in  a  dry  and  mournful  tone.

As  she  named  the  Empress,  Anna  Pdvlovna's
face  suddenly  assumed  an  expression  of  pro-
found and  sincere  devotion  and  respect  min-
gled with  sadness, and  thisoccurred  every  time
she  mentioned  her  illustrious  patroness.  She
added  that  Her  Majesty  had  deigned  to  show
Baron  Funke  beaucoup  d'estime,  and  again
her  face  clouded  over  with  sadness.

The  prince  was  silent  and  looked  indiffer-
ent. But,  with  the  womanly  and  courtierlike
quickness  and  tact  habitual  to  her,  Anna  Pdv-
lovna wished  both  to  rebuke  him  (for  daring
to  speak  as  he  had  done  of  a  man  recommended
to  the  Empress)  and  at  the  same  time  to  con-
sole him,  so  she  said:

"Now  about  your  family.  Do  you  know  that
since  your  daughter  came  out  everyone  has
been  enraptured  by  her?  They  say  she  is  amaz-
ingly beautiful."

The  prince  bowed  to  signify  his  respect  and
gratitude.

"I  often  think,"  she  continued  after  a  short
pause,  drawing  nearer  to  the  prince  and  smil-
ing amiably  at  him  as  if  to  show  that  political
and  social  topics  were  ended  and  the  time  had
come  for  intimate  conversation— "I  often  think
how  unfairly  sometimes  the  joys  of  life  are  dis-
tributed. Why  has  fate  given  you  two  such
splendid  children?  I  don't  speak  of  Anatole,
your  youngest.  I  don't  like  him,"  she  added  in
a  tone  admitting  of  no  rejoinder  and  raising
her  eyebrows.  "Two  such  charming  children.
And  really  you  appreciate  them  less  than  any-
one, and  so  you  don't  deserve  to  have  them."

And  she  smiled  her  ecstatic  smile.

"I  can't  help  it,"  said  the  prince.  "Lavater
would  have  said  I  lack  the  bump  of  paternity."

"Don't  joke;  I  mean  to  have  a  serious  talk
with  you.  Do  you  know  I  am  dissatisfied  with
your  younger  son?  Between  ourselves"  (and
her  face  assumed  its  melancholy  expression),
"he  was  mentioned  at  Her  Majesty's  and  you
were  pitied.  .  .  ."

The   prince  answered   nothing,   but  she


BOOK  ONE


looked  at  him  significantly,  awaiting  a  reply.
He  frowned.

"What  would  you  have  me  do?"  he  said  at
last.  "You  know  I  did  all  a  father  could  for
their  education,  and  they  have  both  turned
out  fools.  Hippolyte  is  at  least  a  quiet  fool,  but
Anatole  is  an  active  one.  That  is  the  only  dif-
ference between  them."  He  said  this  smiling
in  a  way  more  natural  and  animated  than
usual,  so  that  the  wrinkles  round  his  mouth
very  clearly  revealed  something  unexpectedly
coarse  and  unpleasant.

"And  why  are  children  born  to  such  men  as
you?  If  you  were  not  a  father  there  would  be
nothing  I  could  reproach  you  with,"  said  Anna
Pdvlovna,  looking  up  pensively.

"I  am  your  faithful  slave  and  to  you  alone  I
can  confess  that  my  children  are  the  bane  of
my  life.  It  is  the  cross  I  have  to  bear.  That  is
how  I  explain  it  to  myself.  It  can't  be  helped!"

He  said  no  more,  but  expressed  his  resigna-
tion to  cruel  fate  by  a  gesture.  Anna  Pdvlovna
meditated.

"Have  you  never  thought  of  marrying  your
prodigal  son  Anatole?"  she  asked.  "They  say
old  maids  have  a  mania  for  matchmaking,  and
though  I  don't  feel  that  weakness  in  myself  as
yet,  I  know  a  little  person  who  is  very  unhappy
with  her  father.  She  is  a  relation  of  yours,
Princess  Mary  Bolk6nskaya."

Prince  Vasili  did  not  reply,  though,  with  the
quickness  of  memory  and  perception  befitting
a  man  of  the  world,  he  indicated  by  a  move-
ment of  the  head  that  he  was  considering  this
information.

"Do  you  know,"  he  said  at  last,  evidently
unable  to  check  the  sad  current  of  his  thoughts,
"that  Anatole  is  costing  me  forty  thousand
rubles  a  year?  And,"  he  went  on  after  a  pause,
"what  will  it  be  in  five  years,  if  he  goes  on  like
this?"  Presently  he  added:  "That's  what  we

fathers  have  to  put  up  with Is  this  princess

of  yours  rich?"

"Her  father  is  very  rich  and  stingy.  He  lives
in  the  country.  He  is  the  well-known  Prince
Bolk6nski  who  had  to  retire  from  the  army  un-
der the  late  Emperor,  and  was  nicknamed  'the
King  of  Prussia.'  He  is  very  clever  but  eccen-
tric, and  a  bore.  The  poor  girl  is  very  unhappy.
She  has  a  brother;  I  think  you  know  him,  he
married  Lise  Meinen  lately.  He  is  an  aide-de-
camp of  Kutiizov's  and  will  be  here  tonight."

"Listen,  dear  Annette,"  said  the  prince,  sud-
denly taking  Anna  Pdvlovna's  hand  and  for
some  reason  drawing  it  downwards.  "Arrange
that  affair  for  me  and  I  shall  always  be  your


most  devoted  slave— slaje  with  an  /,  as  a  village
elder  of  mine  writes  in  his  reports.  She  is  rich
and  of  good  family  and  that's  all  I  want."

And  with  the  familiarity  and  easy  grace
peculiar  to  him,  he  raised  the  maid  of  honor's
hand  to  his  lips,  kissed  it,  and  swung  it  to  and
fro  as  he  lay  back  in  his  armchair,  looking  in
another  direction.

"Attendee"  said  Anna  Pdvlovna,  reflecting,
"I'll  speak  to  Lise,  young  Bolk6nski's  wife,  this
very  evening,  and  perhaps  the  thing  can  be
arranged.  It  shall  be  on  your  family's  behalf
that  I'll  start  my  apprenticeship  as  old  maid."

CHAPTER  II

ANNA  PAVLOVNA'S  drawing  room  was  gradually
filling.  The  highest  Petersburg  society  was  as-
sembled there:  people  differing  widely  in  age
and  character  but  alike  in  the  social  circle  to
which  they  belonged.  Prince  Vasili's  daughter,
the  beautiful  H£l£ne,  came  to  take  her  father
to  the  ambassador's  entertainment;  she  wore  a
ball  dress  and  her  badge  as  maid  of  honor.  The
youthful  little  Princess  Bolkonskaya,  known
as  la  femme  la  plus  sSduisante  de  Pfaersbourg?
was  also  there.  She  had  been  married  during
the  previous  winter,  and  being  pregnant  did
not  go  to  any  large  gatherings,  but  only  to  small
receptions.  Prince  Vasfli's  son,  Hippolyte,  had
come  with  Mortemart,  whom  he  introduced.
The  Abb6  Morio  and  many  others  had  also
come.

To  each  new  arrival  Anna  Pdvlovna  safcl,
"You  have  not  yet  seen  my  aunt,"  or  "You  do
not  know  my  aunt?"  and  very  gravely  con-
ducted him  or  her  to  a  little  old  lady,  wearing
large  bows  of  ribbon  in  her  cap,  who  had  come
sailing  in  from  another  room  as  soon  as  the
guests  began  to  arrive;  and  slowly  turning  her
eyes  from  the  visitor  to  her  aunt,  Anna  Pdv-
lovna mentioned  each  one's  name  and  then
left  them.

Each  visitor  performed  the  ceremony  of
greeting  this  old  aunt  whom  not  one  of  them
knew,  not  one  of  them  wanted  to  know,  and
not  one  of  them  cared  about;  Anna  Pdvlovna
observed  these  greetings  with  mournful  and  sol-
emn interest  and  silent  approval.  The  aunt
spoke  to  each  of  them  in  the  same  words,  about
their  health  and  her  own,  and  the  health  of
Her  Majesty,  "who,  thank  God,  was  better  to-
day." And  each  visitor,  though  politeness  pre-
vented his  showing  impatience,  left  the  old
woman  with  a  sense  of  relief  at  having  per-
formed a  vexatious  duty  and  did  not  return  to

1  The  most  fascinating  woman  in  Petersburg.


WAR  AND  PEACE


her  the  whole  evening.

The  young  Princess  Bolk6nskaya  had
brought  some  work  in  a  gold-embroidered  vel-
vet bag.  Her  pretty  little  upper  lip,  on  which
a  delicate  dark  down  was  just  perceptible,  was
too  short  for  her  teeth,  but  it  lifted  all  the  more
sweetly,  and  was  especially  charming  when  she
occasionally  drew  it  down  to  meet  the  lower
lip.  As  is  always  the  case  with  a  thoroughly  at-
tractive woman,  her  defect—the  shortness  of
her  upperlip  and  her  half-open  mouth— seemed
to  be  her  own  special  and  peculiar  form  of
beauty.  Everyone  brightened  at  the  sight  of
this  pretty  young  woman,  so  soon  to  become
a  mother,  so  full  of  life  and  health,  and  carry-
ing her  burden  so  lightly.  Old  men  and  dull
dispirited  young  ones  who  looked  at  her,  after
being  in  her  company  and  talking  to  her  a
litttle  while,  felt  as  if  they  too  were  becoming,
like  her,  full  of  life  and  health.  All  who  talked
to  her,  and  at  each  word  saw  her  bright  smile
and  the  constant  gleam  of  her  white  teeth,
thought  that  they  were  in  a  specially  amiable
mood  that  day.

The  little  princess  went  round  the  table
with  quick,  short,  swaying  steps,  her  workbag
on  her  arm,  and  gaily  spreading  out  her  dress
sat  down  on  a  sofa  near  the  silver  samovar,  as
if  all  she  was  doing  was  a  pleasure  to  herself
and  to  all  around  her.  "I  have  brought  my
work,"  said  she  in  French,  displaying  her  bag
and  addressing  all  present.  "Mind,  Annette,
I  hope  you  have  not  played  a  wicked  trick  on
me,"  she  added,  turning  to  her  hostess.  "You
wrote  that  it  was  to  be  quite  a  small  reception,
and  just  see  how  badly  I  am  dressed."  And  she
spread  out  her  arms  to  show  her  short-waisted,
lace-trimmed,  dainty  gray  dress,  girdled  with
a  broad  ribbon  just  below  the  breast.

"Soyez  tranquille,  Lise,  you  will  always  be
prettier  than  anyone  else,"  replied  Anna  Pdv-
lovna.

"You  know/'  said  the  princess  in  the  same
tone  of  voice  and  still  in  French,  turning  to  a
general,  "my  husband  is  deserting  me?  He  is
going  to  get  himself  killed.  Tell  me  what  this
wretched  war  is  for?"  she  added,  addressing
Prince  Vasfli,  and  without  waiting  for  an  an-
swer she  turned  to  speak  to  his  daughter,  the
beautiful  H£l£ne.

"What  a  delightful  woman  this  little  prin-
cess isl"  said  Prince  Vasili  to  Anna  Pdvlovna.

One  of  the  next  arrivals  was  a  stout,  heavily
built  young  man  with  close-cropped  hair,  spec-
tacles, the  light-colored  breeches  fashionable
at  that  time,  a  very  high  ruffle,  and  a  brown


dress  coat.  This  stout  young  man  was  an  illegit-
imate son^of  Count  Bezukhov,  a  well-known
grandee  of  Catherine's  time  who  now  lay  dy-
ing in  Moscow.  The  young  man  had  not  yet
entered  either  the  military  or  civil  service,  as
he  had  only  just  returned  from  abroad  where
he  had  been  educated,  and  this  was  his  first  ap-
pearance in  society.  Anna  Pdvlovna  greeted
him  with  the  nod  she  accorded  to  the  lowest
hierarchy  in  her  drawing  room.  But  in  spite  of
this  lowest-grade  greeting,  a  look  of  anxiety
and  fear,  as  at  the  sight  of  something  too  large
and  unsuited  to  the  place,  came  over  her  face
when  she  saw  Pierre  enter.  Though  he  was  cer-
tainly rather  bigger  than  the  other  men  in  the
room,  her  anxiety  could  only  have  reference
to  the  clever  though  shy,  but  observant  and
natural,  expression  which  distinguished  him
from  everyone  else  in  that  drawing  room.

"It  is  very  good  of  you,  Monsieur  Pierre,  to
come  and  visit  a  poor  invalid,"  said  Anna  Pdv-
lovna,  exchanging  an  alarmed  glance  with  her
aunt  as  she  conducted  him  to  her.

Pierre  murmured  something  unintelligible,
and  continued  to  look  round  as  if  in  search  of
something.  On  his  way  to  the  aunt  he  bowed
to  the  little  princess  with  a  pleased  smile,  as  to
an  intimate  acquaintance.

Anna  Pdvlovna's  alarm  was  justified,  for
Pierre  turned  away  from  the  aunt  without  wait-
ing to  hear  her  speech  about  Her  Majesty's
health.  Anna  Pdvlovna  in  dismay  detained
him  with  the  words:  "Do  you  know  the  Abbe*
Morio?  He  is  a  most  interesting  man."

"Yes,  I  have  heard  of  his  scheme  for  perpet-
ual peace,  and  it  is  very  interesting  but  hardly
feasible."

"You  think  so?"  rejoined  Anna  Pdvlovna  in
order  to  say  something  and  get  away  to  attend
to  her  duties  as  hostess.  But  Pierre  now  com-
mitted a  reverse  act  of  impoliteness.  First  he
had  left  a  lady  before  she  had  finished  speak-
ing to  him,  and  now  he  continued  to  speak  to
another  who  wished  to  getaway.  With  his  head
bent,  and  his  big  feet  spread  apart,  he  began
explaining  his  reasons  for  thinking  the  abbess
plan  chimerical.

"We  will  talk  of  it  later,"  said  Anna  Pdv-
lovna  with  a  smile.

And  having  got  rid  of  this  young  man  who
did  not  know  how  to  behave,  she  resumed  her
duties  as  hostess  and  continued  to  listen  and
watch,  ready  to  help  at  any  point  where  the
conversation  might  happen  to  flag.  As  the  fore-
man of  a  spinning  mill,  when  he  has  set  the
hands  to  work,  goes  round  and  notices  here  a


BOOK  ONE


spindle  that  has  stopped  or  there  one  that
creaks  or  makes  more  noise  than  it  should,  and
hastens  to  check  the  machine  or  set  it  in  proper
motion,  so  Anna  Pavlovna  moved  about  her
drawing  room,  approaching  now  a  silent,  now
a  too-noisy  group,  and  by  a  word  or  slight  re-
arrangement kept  the  conversational  machine
in  steady,  proper,  and  regular  motion.  But
amid  these  cares  her  anxiety  about  Pierre  was
evident.  She  kept  an  anxious  watch  on  him
when  he  approached  the  group  round  Morte-
mart  to  listen  to  what  was  being  said  there,  and
again  when  he  passed  to  another  group  whose
center  was  the  abbe*.

Pierre  had  been  educated  abroad,  and  this
reception  at  Anna  Pavlovna's  was  the  first  he
had  attended  in  Russia.  He  knew  that  all  the
intellectual  lights  of  Petersburg  were  gathered
there  and,  like  a  child  in  a  toyshop,  did  not
know  which  way  to  look,  afraid  of  missing  any
clever  conversation  that  was  to  be  heard.  See-
ing the  self-confident  and  refined  expression
on  the  faces  of  those  present  he  was  always  ex-
pecting to  hear  something  very  profound.  At
last  he  came  up  to  Morio.  Here  the  conversa-
tion seemed  interesting  and  he  stood  waiting
for  an  opportunity  to  express  his  own  views,
as  young  people  are  fond  of  doing.

CHAPTER  III

ANNA  PAVLOVNA'S  reception  was  in  full  swing.
The  spindles  hummed  steadily  and  ceaselessly
on  all  sides.  With  the  exception  of  the  aunt,
beside  whom  sat  only  one  elderly  lady,  who
with  her  thin  careworn  face  was  rather  out  of
place  in  this  brilliant  society,  the  whole  com-
pany had  settled  into  three  groups.  One,  chiefly
masculine,  had  formed  round  the  abbe".  An-
other, of  young  people,  was  grouped  round
the  beautiful  Princess  H£l£ne,  Prince  Vasfli's
daughter,  and  the  little  Princess  Bolk6nskaya,
very  pretty  and  rosy,  though  rather  too  plump
for  her  age.  The  third  group  was  gathered
round  Mortemart  and  Anna  Pavlovna.

The  vicomte  was  a  nice-looking  young  man
with  soft  features  and  polished  manners,  who
evidently  considered  himself  a  celebrity  but
out  of  politeness  modestly  placed  himself  at
the  disposal  of  the  circle  in  which  he  found
himself.  Anna  Pdvlovna  was  obviously  serving
him  up  as  a  treat  to  her  guests.  As  a  clever
maitre  d'hotel  serves  up  as  a  specially  choice
delicacy  a  piece  of  meat  that  no  one  who  had
seen  it  in  the  kitchen  would  have  cared  to  eat,
so  Anna  Pavlovna  served  up  to  her  guests,  first
the  vicomte  and  then  the  abbe*,  as  peculiarly


choice  morsels.  The  group  about  Mortemart
immediately  began  discussing  the  murder  of  the
Due  d'Enghien.  The  vicomte  said  that  the  Due
d'Enghien  had  perished  by  his  own  magna-
nimity, and  that  there  were  particular  reasons
for  Buonaparte's  hatred  of  him.

"Ah,  yes!  Do  tell  us  all  about  it,  Vicomte,"
said  Anna  Pdvlovna,  with  a  pleasant  feeling
that  there  was  something  a  la  Louis  XV  in  the
sound  of  that  sentence:  "Contez  nous  gela,
Vicomte."

The  vicomte  bowed  and  smiled  courteously
in  token  of  his  willingness  to  comply.  Anna
Pavlovna  arranged  a  group  round  him,  invit-
ing everyone  to  listen  to  his  tale.

"The  vicomte  knew  the  due  personally,"
whispered  Anna  Pdvlovna  to  one  of  the  guests.
"The  vicomte  is  a  wonderful  raconteur,"  said
she  to  another.  "How  evidently  he  belongs  to
the  best  society,"  said  she  to  a  third;  and  the
vicomte  was  served  up  to  the  company  in  the
choicest  and  most  advantageous  style,  like  a
well-garnished  joint  of  roast  beef  on  a  hot
dish.

The  vicomte  wished  to  begin  his  story  and
gave  a  subtle  smile.

"Come  over  here,  H£l£ne,  dear,"  said  Anna
P£vlovna  to  the  beautiful  young  princess  who
was  sitting  some  way  off,  the  center  of  another
group.

The  princess  smiled.  She  rose  with  the  same
unchanging  smile  with  which  she  had  first  en-
tered the  room— the  smile  of  a  perfectly  beauti-
ful woman.  With  a  slight  rustle  of  her  white
dress  trimmed  with  moss  and  ivy,  with  a  gleam
of  white  shoulders,  glossy  hair,  and  sparkling
diamonds,  she  passed  between  the  men  who
made  way  for  her,  not  looking  at  any  of  them
but  smiling  on  all,  as  if  graciously  allowing
each  the  privilege  of  admiring  her  beautiful
figure  and  shapely  shoulders,  back,  and  bosom
—which  in  the  fashion  of  those  days  were  very
much  exposed— and  she  seemed  to  bring  the
glamour  of  a  ballroom  with  her  as  she  moved
toward  Anna  Pavlovna.  H£lene  was  so  lovely
that  not  only  did  she  not  show  any  trace  of
coquetry,  but  on  the  contrary  she  even  appeared
shy  of  her  unquestionable  and  all  too  victori-
ous beauty.  She  seemed  to  wish,  but  to  be  un-
able, to  diminish  its  effect.

"How  lovely!"  said  everyone  who  saw  her;
and  the  vicomte  lifted  his  shoulders  and
dropped  his  eyes  as  if  startled  by  something  ex-
traordinary when  she  took  her  seat  opposite  and
beamed  upon  him  also  with  her  unchanging
smile.


6


WAR  AND  PEACE


"Madame,  I  doubt  my  ability  before  such
an  audience,"  said  he,  smilingly  inclining  his
head.

The  princess  rested  her  bare  round  arm  on
a  little  table  and  considered  a  reply  unneces-
sary. She  smilingly  waited.  All  the  time  the
story  was  being  told  she  sat  upright,  glancing
now  at  her  beautiful  round  arm,  altered  in
shape  by  its  pressure  on  the  table,  now  at  her
still  more  beautiful  bosom,  on  which  she  read-
justed a  diamond  necklace.  From  time  to  time
she  smoothed  the  folds  of  her  dress,  and  when-
ever the  story  produced  an  effect  she  glanced
at  Anna  Pavlovna,  at  once  adopted  just  the
expression  she  saw  on  the  maid  of  honor's  face,
and  again  relapsed  into  her  radiant  smile.

The  little  princess  had  also  left  the  tea  table
and  followed  Hel£ne.

"Wait  a  moment,  I'll  get  my  work. . .  .  Now
then,  what  are  you  thinking  of?"  she  went  on,
turning  to  Prince  Hippolyte.  "Fetch  me  my
workbag."

There  was  a  general  movement  as  the  prin-
cess, smiling  and  talking  merrily  to  everyone
at  once,  sat  down  and  gaily  arranged  herself  in
her  seat.

"Now  I  am  all  right,"  she  said,  and  asking
the  vicomte  to  begin,  she  took  up  her  work.

Prince  Hippolyte, having  brought  the  work-
bag,  joined  the  circle  and  moving  a  chair  close
to  hers  seated  himself  beside  her.

Le  charmant  Hippolyte  was  surprising  by
his  extraordinary  resemblance  to  his  beautiful
sister,  but  yet  more  by  the  fact  that  in  spite  of
this  resemblance  he  was  exceedingly  ugly.  His
features  were  like  his  sister's,  but  while  in  her
case  everything  was  lit  up  by  a  joyous,  self-
satisfied,  youthful,  and  constant  smile  of  ani-
mation, and  by  the  wonderful  classic  beauty
of  her  figure,  his  face  on  the  contrary  was
dulled  by  imbecility  and  a  constant  expression
of  sullen  self-confidence,  while  his  body  was
thin  and  weak.  His  eyes,  nose,  and  mouth  all
seemed  puckered  into  a  vacant,  wearied  gri-
mace, and  his  arms  and  legs  always  fell  into
unnatural  positions.

"It's  not  going  to  be  a  ghost  story?"  said  he,
sitting  down  beside  the  princess  and  hastily
adjusting  his  lorgnette,  as  if  without  this  in-
strument he  could  not  begin  to  speak.

"Why  no,  my  dear  fellow,"  said  the  aston-
ished narrator,  shrugging  his  shoulders.

"Because  I  hate  ghost  stones,"  said  Prince
Hippolyte  in  a  tone  which  showed  that  he  only
understood  die  meaning  of  his  words  after  he
had  uttered  them.


He  spoke  with  such  self-confidence  that  his
hearers  £ould  not  be  sure  whether  what  he  said
was  very  witty  or  very  stupid.  He  was  dressed
in  a  dark-green  dress  coat,  knee  breeches  of
the  color  of  cuisse  de  nymphe  effrayJe,  as  he
called  it,  shoes,  and  silk  stockings.

The  vicomte  told  his  tale  very  neatly.  It  was
an  anecdote,  then  current,  to  the  effect  that
the  Due  d'Enghien  had  gone  secretly  to  Paris
to  visit  Mademoiselle  George;  thatat  her  house
he  came  upon  Bonaparte,  who  also  enjoyed
the  famous  actress'  favors,  and  that  in  his  pres-
ence Napoleon  happened  to  fall  into  one  of
the  fainting  fits  to  which  he  was  subject,  and
was  thus  at  the  due's  mercy.  The  latter  spared
him,  and  this  magnanimity  Bonaparte  subse-
quently repaid  by  death.

The  story  was  very  pretty  and  interesting,
especially  at  the  point  where  the  rivals  sud-
denly recognized  one  another;  and  the  ladies
looked  agitated.

"Charming!"  said  Anna  PAvlovna  with  an  in-
quiring glance  at  the  little  princess.

"Charming!"  whispered  the  little  princess,
sticking  the  needle  into  her  work  as  if  to  testify
that  the  interest  and  fascination  of  the  story
prevented  her  from  going  on  with  it.

The  vicomte  appreciated  this  silent  praise
and  smiling  gratefully  prepared  to  continue,
but  just  then  Anna  Pavlovna,  who  had  kept  a
watchful  eye  on  the  young  man  who  so  alarmed
her,  noticed  that  he  was  talking  too  loudly
and  vehemently  with  the  abbe",  so  she  hurried
to  the  rescue.  Pierre  had  managed  to  start  a
conversation  with  the  abb£  about  the  balance
of  power,  and  the  latter,  evidently  interested
by  the  young  man's  simple-minded  eagerness,
was  explaining  his  pet  theory.  Both  were  talk-
ing and  listening  too  eagerly  and  too  naturally,
which  was  why  Anna  Pavlovna  disapproved.

"The  means  are  . . .  the  balance  of  power  in
Europe  and  the  rights  of  the  people,"  the  abbe*
was  saying.  "It  is  only  necessary  for  one  power-
ful nation  like  Russia— barbaric  as  she  is  said
to  be— to  place  herself  disinterestedly  at  the
head  of  an  alliance  having  for  its  object  the
mai  n  tenance  of  the  balance  of  power  of  Europe,
and  it  would  save  the  world!"

"But  how  are  you  to  get  that  balance?"  Pierre
was  beginning.

At  that  moment  Anna  Pdvlovna  came  up  and,
looking  severely  at  Pierre,  asked  the  Italian
how  he  stood  the  Russian  climate.  The  Italian's
face  instantly  changed  and  assumed  an  offen-
sively affected,  sugary  expression,  evidently
habitual  to  him  when  conversing  with  women.


BOOK

"I  am  so  enchanted  by  the  brilliancy  of  the
wit  and  culture  of  the  society,  more  especially
of  the  feminine  society,  in  which  I  have  had
the  honor  of  being  received,  that  I  have  not
yet  had  time  to  think  of  the  climate,"  said  he.

Not  letting  the  abbe"  and  Pierre  escape,  Anna
Pdvlovna,  the  more  conveniently  to  keep  them
under  observation,  brought  them  into  the
larger  circle.

CHAPTER  IV

JUST  THEN  another  visitor  entered  the  drawing
room:  Prince  Andrew  Bolk6nski,  the  little
princess'  husband.  He  was  a  very  handsome
young  man,  of  medium  height,  with  firm,  clear-
cut  features.  Everything  about  him,  from  his
weary,  bored  expression  to  his  quiet,  measured
step,  offered  a  most  striking  contrast  to  his
lively  little  wife.  It  was  evident  that  he  not
only  knew  everyone  in  the  drawing  room,  but
had  found  them  to  be  so  tiresome  that  it
wearied  him  to  look  at  or  listen  to  them.  And
among  all  these  faces  that  he  found  so  tedious,
none  seemed  to  bore  him  so  much  as  that  of
his  pretty  wife.  He  turned  away  from  her  with
a  grimace  that  distorted  his  handsome  face,
kissed  Anna  Pdvlovna's  hand,  and  screwing
up  his  eyes  scanned  the  whole  company.

"You  are  off  to  the  war,  Prince?"  said  Anna
Pdvlovna.

"General  Kutuzov,"  said  Bolk6nski,  speak-
ing French  and  stressing  the  last  syllable  of  the
general's  name  like  a  Frenchman,  "has  been
pleased  to  take  me  as  an  aide-de-camp.  .  .  ."

"And  Lise,  your  wile?"

"She  will  go  to  the  country."

"Are  you  not  ashamed  to  deprive  us  of  your
charming  wife?"

"Andre,"  said  his  wife,  addressing  her  hus-
band in  the  same  coquettish  manner  in  which
she  spoke  to  other  men,  "the  vicomte  has  been
telling  us  such  a  tale  about  Mademoiselle
George  and  Buonaparte!"

Prince  Andrew  screwed  up  his  eyes  and
turned  away.  Pierre,  who  from  the  moment
Prince  Andrew  entered  the  room  had  watched
him  with  glad,  affectionate  eyes,  now  came  up
and  took  his  arm.  Before  he  looked  round
Prince  Andrew  frowned  again,  expressing  his
annoyance  with  whoever  was  touching  his  arm,
but  when  he  saw  Pierre's  beaming  face  he  gave
him  an  unexpectedly  kind  and  pleasant  smile.

"There  now! ...  So  you,  too,  are  in  the  great
world?"  said  he  to  Pierre.

"I  knew  you  would  be  here,"  replied  Pierre.
"I  will  come  to  supper  with  you.  May  I?"  he


ONE  7

added  in  a  low  voice  so  as  not  to  disturb  the
vicomte  who  was  continuing  his  story.

"No,  impossible  1"  said  Prince  Andrew,
laughing  and  pressing  Pierre's  hand  to  show
that  there  was  no  need  to  ask  the  question.  He
wished  to  say  something  more,  but  at  that  mo-
ment Prince  Vastti  and  his  daughter  got  up  to
go  and  the  two  young  men  rose  to  let  them
pass.

"You  must  excuse  me,  dear  Vicomte,"  said
Prince  Vasili  to  the  Frenchman,  holding  him
down  by  the  sleeve  in  a  friendly  way  to  prevent
his  rising.  "This  unfortunate  fete  at  the  ambas-
sador's deprives  me  of  a  pleasure,  and  obliges
me  to  interrupt  you.  I  am  very  sorry  to  leave
your  enchanting  party,"  said  he,  turning  to
Anna  Pdvlovna.

His  daughter,  Princess  He*lene,  passed  be-
tween the  chairs,  lightly  holding  up  the  folds
of  her  dress,  and  the  smile  shone  still  more
radiantly  on  her  beautiful  face.  Pierre  gazed
at  her  with  rapturous,  almost  frightened,  eyes
as  she  passed  him.

"Very  lovely,"  said  Prince  Andrew.

"Very,"  said  Pierre.

In  passing,  Prince  Vasili  seized  Pierre's  hand
and  said  to  Anna  Pdvlovna:  "Educate  this  bear
for  me!  He  has  been  staying  with  me  a  whole
month  and  this  is  the  first  time  I  have  seen
him  in  society.  Nothing  is  so  necessary  for  a
young  man  as  the  society  of  clever  women."

ANNA  PAVLOVNA  smiled  and  promised  to  take
Pierre  in  hand.  She  knew  his  father  to  be
a  connection  of  Prince  Vasili's.  The  elderly
lady  who  had  been  sitting  with  the  old  aunt
rose  hurriedly  and  overtook  Prince  Vasfli  in
the  anteroom.  All  the  affectation  of  interest
she  had  assumed  had  left  her  kindly  and  tear-
worn  face  and  it  now  expressed  only  anxiety
and  fear.

"How  about  my  son  Borfs,  Prince?"  said
she,  hurrying  after  him  into  the  anteroom.  "1
can't  remain  any  longer  in  Petersburg.  Tell
me  what  news  I  may  take  back  to  my  poor
boy."

Although  Prince  Vasili  listened  reluctantly
and  not  very  politely  to  the  elderly  lady,  even
betraying  some  impatience,  she  gave  him  an
ingratiating  and  appealing  smile,  and  took  his
hand  that  he  might  not  go  away.

"What  would  it  cost  you  to  say  a  word  to  the
Emperor,  and  then  he  would  be  transferred  to
the  Guards  at  once?"  said  she.

"Believe  me,  Princess,  I  am  ready  to  do  all
I  can,"  answered  Prince  Vasili,  "but  it  is  dif-


8


WAR  AND  PEACE


ficult  for  me  to  ask  the  Emperor.  I  should  ad-
vise you  to  appeal  to  Rumydntsev  through
Prince  Golftsyn.  That  would  be  the  best  way."

The  elderly  lady  was  a  Princess  Drubet-
skdya,  belonging  to  one  of  the  best  families  in
Russia,  but  she  was  poor,  and  having  long  been
out  of  society  had  lost  her  former  influential
connections.  She  had  now  come  to  Petersburg
to  procure  an  appointment  in  the  Guards  for
her  only  son.  It  was,  in  fact,  solely  to  meet
Prince  Vasfli  that  she  had  obtained  an  invita-
tion to  Anna  Pdvlovna's  reception  and  had  sat
listening  to  the  vicomte's  story.  Prince  Vasfli's
words  frightened  her,  an  embittered  look
clouded  her  once  handsome  face,  but  only  for
a  moment;  then  she  smiled  again  and  clutched
Prince  Vasili's  arm  more  tightly.

"Listen  to  me,  Prince,"  said  she.  "I  have
never  yet  asked  you  for  anything  and  I  never
will  again,  nor  have  I  ever  reminded  you  of
my  father's  friendship  for  you;  but  now  I  en-
treat you  for  God's  sake  to  do  this  for  my  son
—and  I  shall  always  regard  you  as  a  benefac-
tor," she  added  hurriedly.  "No,  don't  be  angry,
but  promise!  I  have  asked  Golitsyn  and  he  has
refused.  Be  the  kindhearted  man  you  always
were,"  she  said,  trying  to  smile  though  tears
were  in  her  eyes.

"Papa,  we  shall  be  late,"  said  Princess
Hel&ne,  turning  her  beautiful  head  and  look-
ing over  her  classically  molded  shoulder  as
she  stood  waiting  by  the  door.

Influence  in  society,  however,  is  capital  which
has  to  be  economized  if  it  is  to  last.  Prince
Vasfli  knew  this,  and  having  once  realized
that  if  he  asked  on  behalf  of  all  who  begged
of  him,  he  would  soon  be  unable  to  ask  for
himself,  he  became  chary  of  using  his  influ-
ence. But  in  Princess  Drubetskdya's  case  he
felt,  after  her  second  appeal,  something  like
qualms  of  conscience.  She  had  reminded  him
of  what  was  quite  true;  he  had  been  indebted  to
her  father  for  the  first  steps  in  his  career.  More-
over, he  could  see  by  her  manners  that  she  was
one  of  those  women—mostly  mothers— who,
having  once  made  up  their  minds,  will  not  rest
until  they  have  gained  their  end,  and  are  pre-
pared if  necessary  to  go  on  insisting  day  after
day  and  hour  after  hour,  and  even  to  make
scenes.  This  last  consideration  moved  him.

"My  dear  Anna  Mikhdylovna,"  said  he  with
his  usual  familiarity  and  weariness  of  tone,  "it
is  almost  impossible  for  me  to  do  what  you  ask;
but  to  prove  my  devotion  to  you  and  how  I  re-
spect your  father's  memory,  I  will  do  the  im-
possible—your son  shall  be  transferred  to  the


Guards.  Here  is  my  hand  on  it.  Are  you  satis-
fied?" *

"My  dear  benefactor!  This  is  what  I  ex-
pected from  you— I  knew  your  kindness!"  He
turned  to  go.

"Wait— just  a  word!  When  he  has  been  trans-
ferred to  the  Guards  .  .  ."  she  faltered.  "You
are  on  good  terms  with  Michael  Ilari6novich
Kuttizov  . . .  recommend  Boris  to  him  as  adju-
tant! Then  I  shall  be  at  rest,  and  then  . . ."

Prince  Vasili  smiled.

"No,  I  won't  promise  that.  You  don't  know
how  Kutiizov  is  pestered  since  his  appoint-
ment as  Commander  in  Chief.  He  told  me
himself  that  all  the  Moscow  ladies  have  con-
spired to  give  him  all  their  sons  as  adjutants."

"No,  but  do  promise!  I  won't  let  you  go!  My
dear  benefactor  .  .  ."

"Papa,"  said  his  beautiful  daughter  in  the
same  tone  as  before,  "we  shall  be  late."

"Well,  au  revoir!  Good-by!  You  hear  her?"

"Then  tomorrow  you  will  speak  to  the  Em-
peror?"

"Certainly;  but  about  Kutiizov,  I  don't
promise."

"Do  promise,  do  promise,  Vasfli!"  cried
Anna  Mikhdylovna  as  he  went,  with  the  smile
of  a  coquettish  girl,  which  at  one  time  prob-
ably came  naturally  to  her,  but  was  now  very
ill-suited  to  her  careworn  face.

Apparently  she  had  forgotten  her  age  and
by  force  of  habit  employed  all  the  old  fem-
inine arts.  But  as  soon  as  the  prince  had  gone
her  face  resumed  its  former  cold,  artificial  ex-
pression. She  returned  to  the  group  where  the
vicomte  was  still  talking,  and  again  pretended
to  listen,  while  waiting  till  it  would  be  time
to  leave.  Her  task  was  accomplished.

CHAPTER  V

"AND  what  do  you  think  of  this  latest  com-
edy, the  coronation  at  Milan?"  asked  Anna
Pavlovna,  "and  of  the  comedy  of  the  people
of  Genoa  and  Lucca  laying  their  petitions
before  Monsieur  Buonaparte,  and  Monsieur
Buonaparte  sitting  on  a  throne  and  granting
the  petitions  of  the  nations?  Adorable!  It  is
enough  to  make  one's  head  whirl!  It  is  as  if
the  whole  world  had  gone  crazy."

Prince  Andrew  looked  Anna  Pdvlovna
straight  in  the  face  with  a  sarcastic  smile.

"  'Dieu  me  la  donne,  gare  a  qui  la  touched J
They  say  he  was  very  fine  when  he  said  that,"
he  remarked,  repeating  the  words  in  Italian:

1  God  has  given  it  to  me,  let  him  who  touches  it
beware)


BOOK

"  'Dio  mi  rha  dato.  Guai  a  chi  la  tocchi!'  "

"I  hope  this  will  prove  the  last  cft*op  that
will  make  the  glass  run  over,"  Anna  Pavlovna
continued.  "The  sovereigns  will  not  be  able  to
endure  this  man  who  is  a  menace  to  every-
thing."

"The  sovereigns?  I  do  not  speak  of  Russia,"
said  the  vicomte,  polite  but  hopeless:  "The
sovereigns,  madame  .  .  .  What  have  they  done
for  Louis  XVII,  for  the  Queen,  or  for  Madame
Elizabeth?  Nothing!"  and  he  became  more  an-
imated. "And  believe  me,  they  are  reaping  the
reward  of  their  betrayal  of  the  Bourbon  cause.
The  sovereigns!  Why,  they  are  sending  am-
bassadors to  compliment  the  usurper."

And  sighing  disdainfully,  he  again  changed
his  position.

Prince  Hippolyte,  who  had  been  gazing  at
the  vicomte  for  some  time  through  his  lor-
gnette, suddenly  turned  completely  round  to-
ward the  little  princess,  and  having  asked  for
a  needle  began  tracing  the  Conde*  coat  of  arms
on  the  table.  He  explained  this  to  her  with  as
much  gravity  as  if  she  had  asked  him  to  do  it.

"Baton  de  gueules,  engrele  de  gueules  d'
azur—maison  Condd,"  said  he.

The  princess  listened,  smiling.

"If  Buonaparte  remains  on  the  throne  of
France  a  year  longer,"  the  vicomte  continued,
with  the  air  of  a  man  who,  in  a  matter  with
which  he  is  better  acquainted  than  anyone  else,
does  not  listen  to  others  but  follows  the  cur-
rent of  his  own  thoughts,  "things  will  have
gone  too  far.  By  intrigues,  violence,  exile,  and
executions,French  society— I  mean  good  French
society— will  have  been  forever  destroyed,  and
then  .  .  ."

He  shrugged  his  shoulders  and  spread  out
his  hands.  JPierre  wished  to  make  a  remark,  for
the  conversation  interested  him,  but  Anna
Pdvlovna,  who  had  him  under  observation,  in-
terrupted:

"The  Emperor  Alexander,"  said  she,  with
the  melancholy  which  always  accompanied  any
reference  of  hers  to  the  Imperial  family,  "has
declared  that  he  will  leave  it  to  the  French
people  themselves  to  choose  their  own  form
of  government;  and  I  believe  that  once  free
from  the  usurper,  the  whole  nation  will  cer-
tainly throw  itself  into  the  arms  of  its  rightful
king,"  she  concluded,  trying  to  be  amiable  to
the  royalist  emigrant.

.  "That  is  doubtful,"  said  Prince  Andrew.
"Monsieur  le  Vicomte  quite  rightly  supposes
that  matters  have  already  gone  too  far.  I  think
it  will  be  difficult  to  return  to  the  old  regime."


ONE  9

"From  what  I  have  heard,"  said  Pierre,
blushing  and  breaking  into  the  conversation,
"almost  all  the  aristocracy  has  already  gone
over  to  Bonaparte's  side."

"It  is  the  Buonapartists  who  say  that,"  re-
plied the  vicomte  without  looking  at  Pierre.
"At  the  present  time  it  is  difficult  to  know  the
real  state  of  French  public  opinion."

"Bonaparte  has  said  so,"  remarked  Prince
Andrew  with  a  sarcastic  smile.

It  was  evident  that  he  did  not  like  the  vi-
comte and  was  aiming  his  remarks  at  him,
though  without  looking  at  him.

"  'I  showed  them  the  path  to  glory,  but  they
did  not  follow  it,'  "  Prince  Andrew  continued
after  a  short  silence,  again  quoting  Napoleon's
words.  "  'I  opened  my  antechambers  and  they
crowded  in.'  I  do  not  know  how  far  he  was
justified  in  saying  so."

"Not  in  the  least,"  replied  the  vicomte.  "Aft-
er the  murder  of  the  due  even  the  most  par-
tial ceased  to  regard  him  as  a  hero.  If  to  some
people,"  he  went  on,  turning  to  Anna  Pav-
lovna, "he  ever  was  a  hero,  after  the  murder
of  the  due  there  was  one  martyr  more  in  heav-
en and  one  hero  less  on  earth."

Before  Anna  Pdvlovna  and  the  others  had
time  to  smile  their  appreciation  of  the  vi-
comte's  epigram,  Pierre  again  broke  into  the
conversation,  and  though  Anna  Pdvlovna  felt
sure  he  would  say  something  inappropriate,
she  was  unable  to  stop  him.

"The  execution  of  the  Due  d'Enghien,"  de-
clared Monsieur  Pierre,  "was  a  political  neces-
sity, and  it  seems  to  me  that  Napoleon  showed
greatness  of  soul  by  not  fearing  to  take  on  him-
self  the  whole  responsibility  of  that  deed."

"Dieu!  Mon  Dieu!"  muttered  Anna  Pav-
lovna in  a  terrified  whisper.

"What,  Monsieur  Pierre  .  .  .  Do  you  con-
sider that  assassination  shows  greatness  of
soul?"  said  the  little  princess,  smiling  and
drawing  her  work  nearer  to  her.

"Oh!  Oh!"  exclaimed  several  voices.

"Capital!"  said  Prince  Hippolyte  in  Eng-
lish, and  began  slapping  his  knee  with  the
palm  of  his  hand.

The  vicomte  merely  shrugged  his  shoulders.
Pierre  looked  solemnly  at  his  audience  over
his  spectacles  and  continued.

"I  say  so,"  he  continued  desperately,  "be-
cause the  Bourbons  fled  from  the  Revolution
leaving  the  people  to  anarchy,  and  Napoleon
alone  understood  the  Revolution  and  quelled
it,  and  so  for  the  general  good,  he  could  not
stop  short  for  the  sake  of  one  man's  life."


1O

"Won't  you  come  over  to  the  other  table?"
suggested  Anna  P£vlovna,

But  Pierre  continued  his  speech  without
heeding  her.

"No,"  cried  he,  becoming  more  and  more
eager,  "Napoleon  is  great  because  he  rose  su-
perior to  the  Revolution,  suppressed  its  a-
buses,  preserved  all  that  was  good  in  it—equal-
ity of  citizenship  and  freedom  of  speech  and
of  the  press— and  only  for  that  reason  did  he
obtain  power."

"Yes,  if  having  obtained  power,  without  a-
vailing  himself  of  it  to  commit  murder  he  had
restored  it  to  the  rightful  king,  I  should  have
called  him  a  great  man,"  remarked  the  vi-
comte.

"He  could  not  do  that.  The  people  only
gave  him  power  that  he  might  rid  them  of  the
Bourbons  and  because  they  saw  that  he  was  a
great  man.  The  Revolution  was  a  grand  thing!"
continued  Monsieur  Pierre,  betraying  by  this
desperate  and  provocative  proposition  his  ex-
treme youth  and  his  wish  to  express  all  that
was  in  his  mind.

"What?  Revolution  and  regicide  a  grand
thing?  .  .  .  Well,  after  that  .  .  .  But  won't  you
come  to  this  other  table?"  repeated  Anna  Pdv-
lovna.

"Rousseau's  Contrat  social,"  said  the  vi-
comte  with  a  tolerant  smile.

"I  am  not  speaking  of  regicide,  I  am  speak-
ing about  ideas."

"Yes:  ideas  of  robbery,  murder,  and  regi-
cide," again  interjected  an  ironical  voice.

"Those  were  extremes,  no  doubt,  but  they
are  not  what  is  most  important.  What  is  im-
portant are  the  rights  of  man,  emancipation
from  prejudices,  and  equality  of  citizenship,
and  all  these  ideas  Napoleon  has  retained  in
full  force."

"Liberty  and  equality,"  said  the  vicomte
contemptuously,  as  if  at  last  deciding  seriously
to  prove  to  this  youth  how  foolish  his  words
were,  "high-sounding  words  which  have  long
been  discredited.  Who  does  not  love  liberty
and  equality?  Even  our  Saviour  preached  lib-
erty and  equality.  Have  people  since  the  Rev-
olution become  happier?  On  the  contrary.  We
wanted  liberty,  but  Buonaparte  has  destroyed
it."

Prince  Andrew  kept  looking  with  an  a-
mused  smile  from  Pierre  to  the  vicomte  and
from  the  vicomte  to  their  hostess.  In  the  first
moment  of  Pierre's  outburst  Anna  Pdvlovna,
despite  her  social  experience,  was  horror-
struck.  But  when  she  saw  that  Pierre's  sacri-


WAR  AND  PEACE


legious  words  had  not  exasperated  the  vi-
comte, ahd  had  convinced  herself  that  it  was
impossible  to  stop  him,  she  rallied  her  forces
and  joined  the  vicomte  in  a  vigorous  attack  on
the  orator.

"But,  my  dear  Monsieur  Pierre,"  said  she,
"how  do  you  explain  the  fact  of  a  great  man
executing  a  due— or  even  an  ordinary  man—
who  is  innocent  and  untried?"

"I  should  like,"  said  the  vicomte,  "to  ask
how  monsieur  explains  the  iSthBrumaire;  was
not  that  an  imposture?  It  was  a  swindle,  and
not  at  all  like  the  conduct  of  a  great  man!"

"And  the  prisoners  he  killed  in  Africa?That
was  horrible!"  said  the  little  princess,  shrug-
ging her  shoulders.

"He's  a  low  fellow,  say  what  you  will,"  re-
marked Prince  Hippolyte.

Pierre,  not  knowing  whom  to  answer,  looked
at  them  all  and  smiled.  His  smile  was  unlike
the  half-smile  of  other  people.  When  he  smiled,
his  grave,  even  rather  gloomy,  look  was  instan-
taneously replaced  by  another— a  childlike,
kindly,  even  rather  silly  look,  which  seemed  to
ask  forgiveness.

The  vicomte  who  was  meeting  him  for  the
first  time  saw  clearly  that  this  young  Jacobin
was  not  so  terrible  as  his  words  suggested.  All
were  silent.

"How  do  you  expect  him  to  answer  you  all
at  once?"  said  Prince  Andrew.  "Besides,  in  the
actions  of  a  statesman  one  has  to  distinguish
between  his  acts  as  a  private  person,  as  a  gen-
eral, and  as  an  emperor.  So  it  seems  to  me."

"Yes,  yes,  of  course!"  Pierre  chimed  in,
pleased  at  the  arrival  of  this  reinforcement.

"One  must  admit,"  continued  Prince  An-
drew, "that  Napoleon  as  a  man  was  great  on
the  bridge  of  Arcola,  and  in  the  hospital  at
Jaffa  where  he  gave  his  hand  to  the  plague-
stricken;  but . . .  but  there  are  other  acts  which
it  is  difficult  to  justify."

Prince  Andrew,  who  had  evidently  wished
to  tone  down  the  awkwardness  of  Pierre's  re-
marks, rose  and  made  a  sign  to  his  wife  that  it
was  time  to  go.

Suddenly  Prince  Hippolyte  started  up  mak-
ing signs  to  everyone  to  attend,  and  asking
them  all  to  be  seated  began:

"I  was  told  a  charming  Moscow  story  today
and  must  treat  you  to  it.  Excuse  me,  Vicomte—
I  must  tell  it  in  Russian  or  the  point  will  be
lost. .  .  ."  And  Prince  Hippolyte  began  to  tell
his  story  in  sucli  Russian  as  a  Frenchman
would  speak  after  spending  about  a  year  in


BOOK  ONE


Russia.  Everyone  waited,  so  emphatically  and
eagerly  did  he  demand  their  attention  to  his
story.

"There  is  in  Moscow  a  lady,  une  dame,  and
she  is  very  stingy.  She  must  have  two  footmen
behind  her  carriage,  and  very  big  ones.  That
was  her  taste.  And  she  had  a  lady's  maid,  also
big.  She  said  .  .  ."

Here  Prince  Hippolyte  paused,  evidently
collecting  his  ideas  with  difficulty.

"She  said  ...  Oh  yes!  She  said,  'Girl,'  to  the
maid,  'put  on  a  livery,  get  up  behind  the  car-
riage, and  come  with  me  while  I  make  some
calls/  "

Here  Prince  Hippolyte  spluttered  andburst
out  laughing  long  before  his  audience,  which
produced  an  effect  unfavorable  to  the  narra-
tor. Several  persons,  among  them  the  elderly
lady  and  Anna  Pavlovna,  did  however  smile.

"She  went.  Suddenly  there  was  a  great  wind.
The  girl  lost  her  hat  and  her  long  hair  came
down.  .  .  ."  Here  he  could  contain  himself  no
longer  and  went  on,  between  gasps  of  laugh-
ter: "And  the  whole  world  knew. .  . ."

And  so  the  anecdote  ended.  Though  it  was
unintelligible  why  he  had  told  it,  or  why  it
had  to  be  told  in  Russian,  still  Anna  Pdvlovna
and  the  others  appreciated  Prince  Hippolyte's
social  tact  in  so  agreeably  ending  Pierre's  un-
pleasant and  unamiable  outburst.  After  the
anecdote  the  conversation  broke  up  into  in-
significant small  talk  about  the  last  and  next
balls,  about  theatricals,  and  who  would  meet
whom,  and  when  and  where.

CHAPTER  VI

HAVING  THANKED  Anna  Pavlovna  for  her
'charming  soiree,  the  guests  began  to  take  their
leave.

Pierre  was  ungainly.  Stout,  about  the  aver-
age height,  broad,  with  huge  red  hands;  he  did
not  know,  as  the  saying  is,  how  to  enter  a  draw-
ing room  and  still  less  how  to  leave  one;  that
is,  how  to  say  something  particularly  agreeable
before  going  away.  Besides  this  he  was  absent-
minded.  When  he  rose  to  go,  he  took  up  in-
stead of  his  own,  the  general's  three-cornered
hat,  and  held  it,  pulling  at  the  plume,  till  the
general  asked  him  to  restore  it.  All  his  absent-
mindedness  and  inability  to  enter  a  room  and
converse  in  it  was,  however,  redeemed  by  his
kindly,  simple,  and  modest  expression.  Anna
Pdvlovna  turned  toward  him  and,  with  a
Christian  mildness  that  expressed  forgiveness
of  his  indiscretion,  nodded  and  said:  "I  hope  to
see  you  again,  but  I  also  hope  you  will  change


your  opinions,  my  dear  Monsieur  Pierre."

When  she  said  this,  he  did  not  reply  and
only  bowed,  but  again  everybody  saw  his  smile,
which  said  nothing,  unless  perhaps,  "Opinions
are  opinions,  but  you  see  what  a  capital,  good-
natured  fellow  I  am."  And  everyone,  includ-
ing Anna  Pavlovna,  felt  this.

Prince  Andrew  had  gone  out  into  the  hall,
and,  turning  his  shoulders  to  the  footman  who
was  helping  him  on  with  his  cloak,  listened  in-
differently to  his  wife's  chatter  with  Prince
Hippolyte  who  had  also  come  into  the  hall.
Prince  Hippolyte  stood  close  to  the  pretty,
pregnant  princess,  and  stared  fixedly  at  hei
through  his  eyeglass.

"Go  in,  Annette,  or  you  will  catch  cold,"
said  the  little  princess,  taking  leave  of  Anna
Pavlovna.  "It  is  settled,"  she  added  in  a  low
voice.

Anna  Pavlovna  had  already  managed  to
speak  to  Lise  about  the  match  she  contem-
plated between  Anatole  and  the  little  princess'
sister-in-law.

"I  rely  on  you,  my  dear,"  said  Anna  Pdv-
lovna,  also  in  a  low  tone.  "Write  to  her  and
let  me  know  how  her  father  looks  at  the  mat-
ter. An  revoir!"—znd  she  left  the  hall.

Prince  Hippolyte  approached  the  little  prin-
cess and,  bending  his  face  close  to  her,  began
to  whisper  something.

Two  footmen,  the  princess'  and  his  own,
stood  holding  a  shawl  and  a  cloak,  waiting  for
the  conversation  to  finish.  They  listened  to
the  French  sentences  which  to  them  were
meaningless,  with  an  air  of  understanding  but
not  wishing  to  appear  to  do  so.  The  princess
as  usual  spoke  smilingly  and  listened  with  a
laugh.

"I  am  very  glad  I  did  not  go  to  the  ambas-
sador's," said  Prince  Hippolyte  "—so  dull—.
It  has  been  a  delightful  evening,  has  it  not?
Delightful!"

"They  say  die  ball  will  be  very  good,"  re-
plied the  princess,  drawing  up  her  downy  lit-
tle lip.  "All  the  pretty  women  in  society  will
be  there."

"Not  all,  for  you  will  not  be  there;  not  all,"
said  Prince  Hippolyte  smiling  joyfully;  and
snatching  the  shawl  from  the  footman,  whom
he  even  pushed  aside,  he  began  wrapping  it
round  the  princess.  Either  from  awkwardness
or  intentionally  (no  one  could  have  said
which)  after  the  shawl  had  been  adjusted  he
kept  his  arm  around  her  for  a  long  time,  as
though  embracing  her.

Still  smiling,  she  gracefully  moved  away,


IS

turning  and  glancing  at  her  husband.  Prince
Andrew's  eyes  were  closed,  so  weary  and  sleepy
did  he  seem.

"Are  you  ready?"  he  asked  his  wife,  look-
ing past  her.

Prince  Hippolyte  hurriedly  put  on  his  cloak,
which  in  the  latest  fashion  reached  to  his  very
heels,  and,  stumbling  in  it,  ran  out  into  the
porch  following  the  princess,  whom  a  footman
was  helping  into  the  carriage.

"Princesse,  au  revoir"  cried  he,  stumbling
with  his  tongue  as  well  as  with  his  feet.

The  princess,  picking  up  her  dress,  was  tak-
ing her  seat  in  the  dark  carriage,  her  husband
was  adjusting  his  saber;  Prince  Hippolyte,  un-
der pretense  of  helping,  was  in  everyone's
way.

"Allow  me,  sir/'  said  Prince  Andrew  in  Rus-
sian in  a  cold,  disagreeable  tone  to  Prince
Hippolyte  who  was  blocking  his  path.

"I  am  expecting  you,  Pierre,"  said  the  same
voice,  but  gently  and  affectionately.

The  postilion  started,  the  carriage  wheels
rattled.  Prince  Hippolyte  laughed  spasmod-
ically as  he  stood  in  the  porch  waiting  for  the
vicomte  whom  he  had  promised  to  take  home.

"Well,  mon  cher"  said  the  vicomte,  having
seated  himself  beside  Hippolyte  in  the  car-
riage, "your  little  princess  is  very  nice,  very
nice  indeed,  quite  French,"  and  he  kissed  the
tips  of  his  fingers.  Hippolyte  burst  out  laugh-
ing.

"Do  you  know,  you  are  a  terrible  chap  for
all  your  innocent  airs,"  continued  the  vicomte.
"I  pity  the  poor  husband,  that  little  officer  who
gives  himself  the  airs  of  a  monarch."

Hippolyte  spluttered  again,  and  amid  his
laughter  said,  "And  you  were  saying  that  the
Russian  ladies  are  not  equal  to  the  French?
One  has  to  know  how  to  deal  with  them."

Pierre  reaching  the  house  first  went  into
Prince  Andrew's  study  like  one  quite  at  home,
and  from  habit  immediately  lay  down  on  the
sofa,  took  from  the  shelf  the  first  book  that
came  to  his  hand  (it  was  Caesar's  Commen-
taries), and  resting  on  his  elbow,  began  read-
ing it  in  the  middle.

"What  have  you  done  to  Mile  Sch^rer?  She
will  be  quite  ill  now,"  said  Prince  Andrew,  as
he  entered  the  study,  rubbing  his  small  white
hands.

Pierre  turned  his  whole  body,  making  the
sofa  creak.  He  lifted  his  eager  face  to  Prince
Andrew,  smiled,  and  waved  his  hand.

"That  abbl  is  very  interesting  but  he  does


WAR  AND  PEACE


not  see  the  thing  in  the  right  light. ...  In  my
opinion  perpetual  peace  is  possible  but— I  do
not  know  how  to  express  it  ...  not  by  a  bal-
ance of  political  power. . . ."

It  was  evident  that  Prince  Andrew  was  not
interested  in  such  abstract  conversation.

"One  can't  everywhere  say  all  one  thinks,
mon  cher.  Well,  have  you  at  last  decided  on
anything?  Are  you  going  to  be  a  guardsman  or
a  diplomatist?"  asked  Prince  Andrew  after  a
momentary  silence.

Pierre  sat  up  on  the  sofa,  with  his  legs
tucked  under  him.

"Really,  I  don't  yet  know.  I  don't  like  either
the  one  or  the  other."

"But  you  must  decide  on  somethingl  Your
father  expects  it."

Pierre  at  the  age  of  ten  had  been  sent  a-
broad  with  an  abb£  as  tutor,  and  had  remained
away  till  he  was  twenty.  When  he  returned  to
Moscow  his  father  dismissed  the  abbe*  and  said
to  the  young  man,  "Now  go  to  Petersburg,
look  round,  and  choose  your  profession.  I  will
agree  to  anything.  Here  is  a  letter  to  Prince
Vasili,  and  here  is  money.  Write  to  me  all
about  it,  and  I  will  help  you  in  everything."
Pierre  had  already  been  choosing  a  career  for
three  months,  and  had  not  decided  on  any-
thing. It  was  about  this  choice  that  Prince
Andrew  was  speaking.  Pierre  rubbed  his  fore-
head.

"But  he  must  be  a  Freemason,"  said  he,  re-
ferring to  the  abb£  whom  he  had  met  that
evening.  (

"That  is  all  nonsense."  Prince  Andrew
again  interrupted  him,  "let  us  talk  business.
Have  you  been  to  the  Horse  Guards?"

"No,  I  have  not;  but  this  is  what  I  have
been  thinking  and  wanted  to  tell  you.  There
is  a  war  now  against  Napoleon.  If  it  were  a
war  for  freedom  I  could  understand  it  and
should  be  the  first  to  enter  the  army;  but  to
help  England  and  Austria  against  the  greatest
man  in  the  world  is  not  right."

Prince  Andrew  only  shrugged  his  shoulders
at  Pierre's  childish  words.  He  put  on  the  air
of  one  who  finds  it  impossible  to  reply  to
such  nonsense,  but  it  would  in  fact  have  been
difficult  to  give  any  other  answer  than  the  one
Prince  Andrew  gave  to  this  naive  question.

"If  no  one  fought  except  on  his  own  con-
viction, there  would  be  no  wars,"  he  said.

"And  that  would  be  splendid,"  said  Pierre.

Prince  Andrew  smiled  ironically.

"Very  likely  it  would  be  splendid,  but  it  will
never  come  about. . . ."


BOOK  ONE


"Well,  why  are  you  going  to  the  war?"  asked
Pierre.  t

"What  for?  I  don't  know.  I  must.  Besides
that  I  am  going  . . ."  He  paused.  "I  am  going
because  the  life  I  am  leading  here  does  not
suit  mel"

CHAPTER  VII

THE  RUSTLE  of  a  woman's  dress  was  heard  in
the  next  room.  Prince  Andrew  shook  himself
as  if  waking  up,  and  his  face  assumed  the  look
it  had  had  in  Anna  Pdvlovna's  drawing  room.
Pierre  removed  his  feet  from  the  sofa.  The
princess  came  in.  She  had  changed  her  gown
for  a  house  dress  as  fresh  and  elegant  as  the
other.  Prince  Andrew  rose  and  politely  placed
a  chair  for  her.

"How  is  it,"  she  began,  as  usual  in  French,
settling  down  briskly  and  fussily  in  the  easy
chair,  "how  is  it  Annette  never  got  married?
How  stupid  you  men  all  are  not  to  have  mar-
ried her!  Excuse  me  for  saying  so,  but  you
have  no  sense  about  women.  What  an  argu-
mentative fellow  you  are,  Monsieur  Pierre!"

"And  I  am  still  arguing  with  your  husband.
I  can't  understand  why  he  wants  to  go  to  the
war,"  replied  Pierre,  addressing  the  princess
with  none  of  the  embarrassment  so  commonly
shown  by  young  men  in  their  intercourse  with
young  women.

The  princess  started.  Evidently  Pierre's
words  touched  her  to  the  quick.

"Ah,  that  is  just  what  I  tell  himl"  said  she.
"I  don't  understand  it;  I  don't  in  the  least  un-
derstand why  men  can't  live  without  wars.
How  is  it  that  we  women  don't  want  anything
of  the  kind,  don't  need  it?  Now  you  shall
judge  between  us.  I  always  tell  him:  Here  he
is  Uncle's  aide-de-camp,  a  most  brilliant  posi-
tion. He  is  so  well  known,  so  much  appreciated
by  everyone.  The  other  day  at  the  Apr£ksins'  I
heard  a  lady  asking,  'Is  that  the  famous  Prince
Andrew?'  I  did  indeed."  She  laughed.  "He  is
so  well  received  everywhere.  He  might  easily
become  aide-de-camp  to  the  Emperor.  You
know  the  Emperor  spoke  to  him  most  gra-
ciously. Annette  and  I  were  speaking  of  how  to
arrange  it.  What  do  you  think?"

Pierre  looked  at  his  friend  and,  noticing
that  he  did  not  like  the  conversation,  gave  no
reply.

"When  are  you  starting?"  he  asked.

"Oh,  don't  speak  of  his  going,  don't!  I  won't
hear  it  spoken  of,"  said  the  princess  in  the
same  petulantly  playful  tone  in  which  she  had
spoken  to  Hippolyte  in  the  drawing  room  and


which  was  so  plainly  ill-suited  to  the  family
circle  of  which  Pierre  was  almost  a  member.
"Today  when  I  remembered  that  all  these  de-
lightful associations  must  be  broken  off  ...
and  then  you  know,  Andr£  .  .  ."  (she  looked
significantly  at  her  husband)  "I'm  afraid,  I'm
afraid!"  she  whispered,  and  a  shudder  ran
down  her  back.

Her  husband  looked  at  her  as  if  surprised  to
notice  that  someone  besides  Pierre  and  him-
self was  in  the  room,  and  addressed  her  in  a
tone  of  frigid  politeness.

"What  is  it  you  are  afraid  of,  Lise?  I  don't
understand,"  said  he.

"There,  what  egotists  men  all  are:  all,  all
egotists!  Just  for  a  whim  of  his  own,  goodness
only  knows  why,  he  leaves  me  and  locks  me  up
alone  in  the  country."

"With  my  father  and  sister,  remember,"  said
Prince  Andrew  gently.

"Alone  all  the  same,  without  my  friends.
. .  .  And  he  expects  me  not  to  be  afraid."

Her  tone  was  now  querulous  and  her  lip
drawn  up,  giving  her  not  a  joyful,  but  an  ani-
mal, squirrel-like  expression.  She  paused  as  if
she  felt  it  indecorous  to  speak  of  her  preg-
nancy before  Pierre,  though  the  gist  of  the
matter  lay  in  that.

"I  still  can't  understand  what  you  are  afraid
of,"  said  Prince  Andrew  slowly,  not  taking  his
eyes  off  his  wife.

The  princess  blushed,  and  raised  her  arms
with  a  gesture  of  despair.

"No,  Andrew,  I  must  say  you  have  changed.
Oh,  how  you  have  . .  ."

"Your  doctor  tells  you  to  go  to  bed  earlier,"
said  Prince  Andrew.  "You  had  better  go."

The  princess  said  nothing,  but  suddenly  her
short  downy  lip  quivered.  Prince  Andrew  rose,
shrugged  his  shoulders,  and  walked  about  the
room.

Pierre  looked  over  his  spectacles  with  nai've
surprise,  now  at  him  and  now  at  her,  moved
as  if  about  to  rise  too,  but  changed  his  mind.

"Why  should  I  mind  Monsieur  Pierre  being
here?"  exclaimed  the  little  princess  suddenly,
her  pretty  face  all  at  once  distorted  by  a  tear-
ful grimace.  "I  have  long  wanted  to  ask  you,
Andrew,  why  you  have  changed  so  to  me?
What  have  I  done  to  you?  You  are  going  to
the  war  and  have  no  pity  for  me.  Why  is  it?"

"Lise!"  was  all  Prince  Andrew  said.  But  that
one  word  expressed  an  entreaty,  a  threat,  and
above  all  conviction  that  she  would  herself  re-
gret her  words.  But  she  went  on  hurriedly:

"You  treat  me  like  an  invalid  or  a  child.  I


WAR  AND  PEACE


see  it  all!  Did  you  behave  like  that  six  months
ago?"

"Lise,  I  beg  you  to  desist,"  said  Prince  An-
drew still  more  emphatically.

Pierre,  who  had  been  growing  more  and
more  agitated  as  he  listened  to  all  this,  rose
and  approached  the  princess.  He  seemed  un-
able to  bear  the  sight  of  tears  and  was  ready  to
cry  himself.

"Calm  yourself,  Princess!  It  seems  so  to  you
because  ...  I  assure  you  I  myself  have  experi-
enced .  .  .  and  so  ...  because  .  .  .  No,  excuse
me!  An  outsider  is  out  of  place  here  .  .  .  No,
don't  distress  yourself  .  .  .  Good-by!"

Prince  Andrew  caught  him  by  the  hand.

"No,  wait,  Pierre!  The  princess  is  too  kind
to  wish  to  deprive  me  of  the  pleasure  of  spend-
ing the  evening  with  you."

"No,  he  thinks  only  of  himself,"  muttered  the
princess  without  restraining  her  angry  tears.

"Lise!"  said  Prince  Andrew  dryly,  raising
his  voice  to  the  pitch  which  indicates  that  pa-
tience is  exhausted.

Suddenly  the  angry,  squirrel-like  expression
of  the  princess'  pretty  face  changed  into  a  win-
ning and  piteous  look  of  fear.  Her  beautiful
eyes  glanced  askance  at  her  husband's  -face,
and  her  own  assumed  the  timid,  deprecating
expression  of  a  dog  when  it  rapidly  but  feebly
wags  its  drooping  tail.

"M on  Dieu,  rnon  Dieu!"  she  muttered,  and
lifting  her  dress  with  one  hand  she  went  up  to
her  husband  and  kissed  him  on  the  forehead.

"Good  night,  Lise,"  said  he,  rising  and  cour-
teously kissing  her  hand  as  he  would  have  done
to  a  stranger.

CHAPTER  VIII

THE  FRIENDS  were  silent.  Neither  cared  to  be-
gin talking.  Pierre  continually  glanced  at
Prince  Andrew;  Prince  Andrew  rubbed  his
forehead  with  his  small  hand.

"Let  us  go  and  have  supper,"  he  said  with  a
sigh,  going  to  the  door.

They  entered  the  elegant,  newly  decorated,
and  luxurious  dining  room.  Everything  from
the  table  napkins  to  the  silver,  china,  and  glass
bore  that  imprint  of  newness  found  in  the
households  of  the  newly  married.  Halfway
through  supper  Prince  Andrew  leaned  his  el-
bows on  the  table  and,  with  a  look  of  nervous
agitation  such  as  Pierre  had  never  before  seen
on  his  face,  began  to  talk— as  one  who  has  long
had  something  on  his  mind  and  suddenly  de-
termines to  speak  out.

"Never,  never  marry,  my  dear  fellow!  That's


my  advice:  never  marry  till  you  can  say  to
yourself  that  you  have  done  all  you  are  capa-
ble of,  and  until  you  have  ceased  to  love  the
woman  of  your  choice  and  have  seen  her  plain-
ly as  she  is,  or  else  you  will  make  a  cruel  and
irrevocable  mistake.  Marry  when  you  are  old
and  good  for  nothing— or  all  that  is  good  and
noble  in  you  will  be  lost.  It  will  all  be  wasted
on  trifles.  Yes!  Yes!  Yes!  Don't  look  at  me  with
such  surprise.  If  you  marry  expecting  anything
from  yourself  in  the  future,  you  will  feel  at
every  step  that  for  you  all  is  ended,  all  is  closed
except  the  drawing  room,  where  you  will  be
ranged  side  by  side  with  a  court  lackey  and  an
idiot!  .  .  .  But  what's  the  good?  .  .  ."  and  he
waved  his  arm.

Pierre  took  off  his  spectacles,  which  made
his  face  seem  different  and  the  good-natured
expression  still  more  apparent,  and  gazed  at
his  friend  in  amazement.

"My  wife,"  continued  Prince  Andrew,  "is
an  excellent  woman,  one  of  those  rare  women
with  whom  a  man's  honor  is  safe;  but,  O  God,
what  would  I  not  give  now  to  be  unmarried!
You  are  the  first  and  only  one  to  whom  I  men-
tion this,  because  I  like  you."

As  he  said  this  Prince  Andrew  was  less  than
ever  like  that  Bolk6nski  who  had  lolled  in
Anna  Pavlovna's  easy  chairs  and  with  half-
closed  eyes  had  uttered  French  phrases  be-
tween his  teeth.  Every  muscle  of  his  thin  face
was  now  quivering  with  nervous  excitement;
his  eyes,  in  which  the  fire  of  life  had  seemed
extinguished,  now  flashed  with  brilliant  light.
It  was  evident  that  the  more  lifeless  he  seemed
at  ordinary  times,  the  more  impassioned  he  be-
came in  these  moments  of  almost  morbid  irri-
tation.

"You  don't  understand  why  I  say  this,"  he
continued,  "but  it  is  the  whole  story  of  life.
You  talk  of  Bonaparte  and  his  career,"  said
he  (though  Pierre  had  not  mentioned  Bona-
parte), "but  Bonaparte  when  he  worked  went
step  by  step  toward  his  goal.  He  was  free,  he
had  nothing  but  his  aim  to  consider,  and  he
reached  it.  But  tie  yourself  up  with  a  woman
and,  like  a  chained  convict,  you  lose  all  free-
dom! And  all  you  have  of  hope  and  strength
merely  weighs  you  down  and  torments  you
with  regret.  Drawing  rooms,  gossip,  balls,  van-
ity, and  triviality— these  are  the  enchanted
circle  I  cannot  escape  from.  I  am  now  going
to  the  war,  the  greatest  war  there  ever  was,
and  I  know  nothing  and  am  fit  for  nothing.
I  am  very  amiable  and  have  a  caustic  wit,"
continued  Prince  Andrew,  "and  at  Anna  Pdv-


BOOK  ONE


lovna's  they  listen  to  me.  And  that  stupid  set
without  whom  my  wife  cannot  exist,  an4  those
women  ...  If  you  only  knew  what  those  society
women  are,  and  women  in  general  I  My  father
is  right.  Selfish,  vain,  stupid,  trivial  in  every-
thing—that's what  women  are  when  you  see
them  in  their  true  colors!  When  you  meet  them
in  society  it  seems  as  if  there  were  something
in  them,  but  there's  nothing,  nothing,  noth-
ing! No,  don't  marry,  my  dear  fellow;  don't
marry!"  concluded  Prince  Andrew.

"It  seems  funny  to  me,"  said  Pierre,  "that
you,  you  should  consider  yourself  incapable
and  your  life  a  spoiled  life.  You  have  every-
thing before  you,  everything.  And  you  .  .  ."

He  did  not  finish  his  sentence,  but  his  tone
showed  how  highly  he  thought  of  his  friend
and  how  much  he  expected  of  him  in  the  fu-
ture.

"How  can  he  talk  like  that?"  thought  Pierre.
He  considered  his  friend  a  model  of  perfec-
tion because  Prince  Andrew  possessed  in  the
highest  degree  just  the  very  qualities  Pierre
lacked,  and  which  might  be  best  described  as
strength  of  will.  Pierre  was  always  astonished
at  Prince  Andrew's  calm  manner  of  treating
everybody,  his  extraordinary  memory,  his  ex-
tensive reading  (he  had  read  everything,  knew
everything,  and  had  an  opinion  about  every-
thing), but  above  all  at  his  capacity  for  work
and  study.  And  if  Pierre  was  often  struck  by
Andrew's  lack  of  capacity  for  philosophical
meditation  (to  which  he  himself  was  particu-
larly addicted),  he  regarded  even  this  not  as  a
defect  but  as  a  sign  of  strength.

Even  in  the  best,  most  friendly  and  sim-
plest relations  of  life,  praise  and  commenda-
tion are  essential,  just  as  grease  is  necessary  to
wheels  that  they  may  run  smoothly.

"My  part  is  played  out,"  said  Prince  An-
drew. "What's  the  use  of  talking  about  me?
Let  us  talk  about  you,"  he  added  after  a  si-
lence, smiling  at  his  reassuring  thoughts.

That  smile  was  immediately  reflected  on
Pierre's  face.

"But  what  is  there  to  say  about  me?"  said
Pierre,  his  face  relaxing  into  a  careless,  merry
smile.  "What  am  I?  An  illegitimate  son!"  He
suddenly  blushed  crimson,  and  it  was  plain  that
he  had  made  a  great  effort  to  say  this.  "With-
out a  name  and  without  means  .  .  .  And  it
really  .  , ."  But  he  did  not  say  what  "it  really"
was.  "For  the  present  I  am  free  and  am  all
right.  Only  I  haven't  the  least  idea  what  I  am
to  do;  I  wanted  to  consult  you  seriously."

Prince  Andrew  looked  kindly  at  him,  yet


his  glance— friendly  and  affectionate  as  it  was
—expressed  a  sense  of  his  own  superiority.

"I  am  fond  of  you,  especially  as  you  are  the
one  live  man  among  our  whole  set.  Yes,  you're
all  right!  Choose  what  you  will;  it's  all  the
same.  You'll  be  all  right  anywhere.  But  look
here:  give  up  visiting  those  Kurdgins  and  lead-
ing that  sort  of  life.  It  suits  you  so  badly— all
this  debauchery,  dissipation,  and  the  rest  of
it!"

"What  would  you  have,  my  dear  fellow?"
answered  Pierre,  shrugging  his  shoulders.
"Women,  my  dear  fellow;  women!"

"I  don't  understand  it,"  replied  Prince  An-
drew. "Women  who  are  comme  il  faut,  that's
a  different  matter;  but  the  Kuragins'  set  of
women,  'women  and  wine,'  I  -don't  under-
stand!"

Pierre  was  staying  at  Prince  Vasili  Kurdgin's
and  sharing  the  dissipated  life  of  his  son  Ana-
tole,  the  son  whom  they  were  planning  to  re-
form by  marrying  him  to  Prince  Andrew's
sister.

"Do  you  know?"  said  Pierre,  as  if  suddenly
struck  by  a  happy  thought,  "seriously,  I  have
long  been  thinking  of  it.  ...  Leading  such  a
life  I  can't  decide  or  think  properly  about  any-
thing. One's  head  aches,  and  one  spends  all
one's  money.  He  asked  me  for  tonight,  but
1  won't  go."

"You  give  me  your  word  of  honor  not  to
go?"

"On  my  honor!"

CHAPTER  IX

1  r  WAS  past  one  o'clock  when  Pierre  left  his
friend.  It  was  a  cloudless,  northern,  summer
night.  Pierre  took  an  open  cab  intending  to
drive  straight  home.  But  the  nearer  he  drew  to
the  house  the  more  he  felt  the  impossibility  of
going  to  sleep  on  such  a  night.  It  was  light
enough  to  see  a  long  way  in  the  deserted  street
and  it  seemed  more  like  morning  or  evening
than  night.  On  the  way  Pierre  remembered
that  Anatole  Kuragin  was  expecting  the  usual
set  for  cards  that  evening,  after  which  there
was  generally  a  drinking  bout,  finishing  with
visits  of  a  kind  Pierre  was  very  fond  of.

"I  should  like  to  go  to  Kuragin's,"  thought
he.

But  he  immediately  recalled  his  promise  to
Prince  Andrew  not  to  go  there.  Then,  as  hap-
pens to  people  of  weak  character,  he  desired
so  passionately  once  more  to  enjoy  that  dissi-
pation he  was  so  accustomed  to  that  he  de-
cided to  go.  The  thought  immediately  occurred


i6


WAR  AND  PEACE


to  him  that  his  promise  to  Prince  Andrew  was
of  no  account,  because  before  he  gave  it  he
had  already  promised  Prince  Anatole  to  come
to  his  gathering;  "besides,"  thought  he,  "all
such  'words  of  honor'  are  conventional  things
with  no  definite  meaning,  especially  if  one
considers  that  by  tomorrow  one  may  be  dead,
or  something  so  extraordinary  may  happen  to
one  that  honor  and  dishonor  will  be  all  the
samel"  Pierre  often  indulged  in  reflections
of  this  sort,  nullifying  all  his  decisions  and  in-
tentions. He  went  to  Kurdgin's.

Reaching  the  large  house  near  the  Horse
Guards'  barracks,  in  which  Anatole  lived,
Pierre  entered  the  lighted  porch,  ascended
the  stairs,  and  went  in  at  the  open  door.  There
was  no  one  in  the  anteroom;  empty  bottles,
cloaks,  and  overshoes  were  lying  about;  there
was  a  smell  of  alcohol,  and  sounds  of  voices
and  shouting  in  the  distance.

Cards  and  supper  were  over,  but  the  visitors
had  not  yet  dispersed.  Pierre  threw  off  his
cloak  and  entered  the  first  room,  in  which  were
the  remains  of  supper.  A  footman,  thinking
no  one  saw  him,  was  drinking  on  the  sly  what
was  left  in  the  glasses.  From  the  third  room
came  sounds  of  laughter,  the  shouting  of  famil-
iar voices,  the  growling  of  a  bear,  and  general
commotion.  Some  eight  or  nine  young  men
were  crowding  anxiously  round  an  open  win-
dow. Three  others  were  romping  with  a  young
bear,  one  pulling  him  by  the  chain  and  trying
to  set  him  at  the  others.

"I  bet  a  hundred  on  Stevens!"  shouted  one.

"Mind,  no  holding  on  I"  cried  another.

"I  bet  on  Dolokhovl"  cried  a  third.  "Kura-
gin,  you  part  our  hands."

"There,  leave  Bruin  alone;  here's  a  bet  on."

"At  one  draught,  or  he  loses!"  shouted  a
fourth.

"Jacob,  bring  a  bottle!"  shouted  the  host,
a  tall,  handsome  fellow  who  stood  in  the  midst
of  the  group,  without  a  coat,  and  with  his  fine
linen  shirt  unfastened  in  front.  "Wait  a  bit,
you  fellows.  .  .  .  Here  is  Pdtya!  Good  man!"
cried  he,  addressing  Pierre.

Another  voice,  from  a  man  of  medium
height  with  clear  blue  eyes,  particularly  strik-
ing among  all  these  drunken  voices  by  its  sober
ring,  criedfrom  thewindow:  "Comehere;  part
the  bets!"  This  was  D61okhov,  an  officer  of  the
Semenov  regiment,  a  notorious  gambler  and
duelist,  who  was  living  with  Anatole.  Pierre
smiled,  looking  about  him  merrily.

"I  don't  understand.  What's  it  all  about?"

"Wait  a  bit,  he  is  not  drunk  yet!  A  bottle


here,"  said  Anatole,  and  taking  a  glass  from
the  ta^le  he  went  up  to  Pierre.

"First  of  all  you  must  drink!"

Pierre  drank  one  glass  after  another,  look-
ing from  under  his  brows  at  the  tipsy  guests
who  were  again  crowding  round  the  window,
and  listening  to  their  chatter.  Anatole  kept  on
refilling  Pierre's  glass  while  explaining  that
D61okhov  was  betting  with  Stevens,  an  Eng-
lish naval  officer,  that  he  would  drink  a  bottle
of  rum  sitting  on  the  outer  ledge  of  the  third-
floor  window  with  his  legs  hanging  out.

"Go  on,  you  must  drink  it  all,"  said  Anatole,
giving  Pierre  the  last  glass,  "or  I  won't  let  you
go!"

"No,  I  won't,"  said  Pierre,  pushing  Anatole
aside,  and  he  went  up  to  the  window.

D61okhov  was  holding  the  Englishman's
hand  and  clearly  and  distinctly  repeating  the
terms  of  the  bet,  addressing  himself  particu-
larly to  Anatole  and  Pierre.

D61okhov  was  of  medium  height,  with  curly
hair  and  light-blue  eyes.  He  was  about  twenty-
five.  Like  all  infantry  officers  he  wore  no  mus-
tache, so  that  his  mouth,  the  most  striking
feature  of  his  face,  was  clearly  seen.  The  lines
of  that  mouth  were  remarkably  finely  curved.
The  middle  of  the  upper  lip  formed  a  sharp
wedge  and  closed  firmly  on  the  firm  lower  one,
and  something  like  two  distinct  smiles  played
continually  round  the  two  corners  of  the
mouth;  this,  together  with  the  resolute,  inso-
lent intelligence  of  his  eyes,  produced  an  effect
which  made  it  impossible  not  to  notice  his
face.  D61okhov  was  a  man  of  small  means  and
no  connections.  Yet,  though  Anatole  spent
tens  of  thousands  of  rubles,  D61okhov  lived
with  him  and  had  placed  himself  on  such  a
footing  that  all  who  knew  them,  including  Ana-
tole himself ,  respected  him  more  than  they  did
Anatole.  D61okhov  could  play  all  games  and
nearly  always  won.  However  much  he  drank,
he  never  lost  his  clearheadedness.  Both  Kurdgin
and  D61okhov  were  at  that  time  notorious
among  the  rakes  and  scapegraces  of  Petersburg.

The  bottle  of  rum  was  brought.  The  window
frame  which  prevented  anyone  from  sitting
on  the  outer  sill  was  being  forced  out  by  two
footmen,  who  were  evidently  flurried  and  in-
timidated by  the  directions  and  shouts  of  the
gentlemen  around.

Anatole  with  his  swaggering  air  strode  up  to
the  window.  He  wanted  to  smash  something.
Pushing  away  the  footmen  he  tugged  at  the
frame,  but  could  not  move  it.  He  smashed  a
pane.


BOOK  ONE


"You  have  a  try,  Hercules/'  said  he,  Burning
to  Pierre.

Pierre  seized  the  crossbeam,  tugged,  and
wrenched  the  oak  frame  out  with  a  crash.

"Take  it  right  out,  or  they'll  think  I'm  hold-
ing on,"  said  D61okhov.

"Is  the  Englishman  bragging?  .  .  .  Eh?  Is  it
all  right?"  said  Anatole.

"First-rate,"  said  Pierre,  looking  at  D61ok-
hov,  who  with  a  bottle  of  rum  in  his  hand  was
approaching  the  window, from  which  the  light
of  the  sky,  the  dawn  merging  with  the  after-
glow of  sunset,  was  visible.

D61okhov,the  bottle  of  rum  still  in  his  hand,
jumped  onto  the  window  sill.  "Listen!"  cried
he,  standing  there  and  addressing  those  in  the
room.  All  were  silent.

"I  bet  fifty  imperials"— he  spoke  French  that
the  Englishman  might  understand  him,  but  he
did  not  speak  it  very  well— "I  bet  fifty  im-
perials ...  or  do  you  wish  to  make  it  a  hun-
dred?" added  he,  addressing  the  Englishman.

"No,  fifty,"  replied  the  latter.

"All  right.  Fifty  imperials  .  .  .  that  I  will
drink  a  whole  bottle  of  rum  without  taking
it  from  my  mouth,  sitting  outside  the  window
on  this  spot"  (he  stooped  and  pointed  to  the
sloping  ledge  outside  the  window)  "and  with-
out holding  on  to  anything.  Is  that  right?"

"Quite  right,"  said  the  Englishman.

Anatole  turned  to  the  Englishman  and  tak-
ing him  by  one  of  the  buttons  of  his  coat  and
looking  down  at  him— the  Englishman  was
short— began  repeating  the  terms  of  the  wager
to  him  in  English.

"Wait!"  cried  Dolokhov,  hammering  with
the  bottle  on  the  window  sill  to  attract  atten-
tion. "Wait  a  bit,  Kuragin.  Listen!  If  anyone
else  does  the  same,  I  will  pay  him  a  hundred
imperials.  Do  you  understand?"

The  Englishman  nodded,  but  gave  no  in-
dication whether  he  intended  to  accept  this
challenge  or  not.  Anatole  did  not  release  him,
and  though  he  kept  nodding  to  show  that  he
understood,  Anatole  went  on  translating  D6-
lokhov's  words  into  English.  A  thin  young  lad,
an  hussar  of  the  Life  Guards,  who  had  been
losing  that  evening,  climbed  on  the  window
sill,  leaned  over,  and  looked  down.

"Ohl  Ohl  Oh!"  he  muttered,  looking  down
from  the  window  at  the  stones  of  the  pave-
ment.

"Shut  up!"  cried  D61okhov,  pushing  him
away  from  the  window.  The  lad  jumped  awk-
wardly back  into  the  room,  tripping  over  his
spurs.


Placing  the  bottle  on  the  window  sill  where
he  could  reach  it  easily,  D61okhov  climbed
carefully  and  slowly  through  the  window  and
lowered  his  legs.  Pressing  against  both  sides
of  the  window,  he  adjusted  himself  on  his  seat,
lowered  his  hands,  moved  a  little  to  the  right
and  then  to  the  left,  and  took  up  the  bottle.
Anatole  brought  two  candles  and  placed  them
on  the  window  sill,  though  it  was  already  quite
light.  Dolokhov's  back  in  his  white  shirt,  and
his  curly  head,  were  lit  up  from  both  sides.
Everyone  crowded  to  the  window,  the  English-
man in  front.  Pierre  stood  smiling  but  silent.
One  man,  older  than  the  others  present,  sud-
denly pushed  forward  with  a  scared  and  angry
look  and  wanted  to  seize  hold  of  Dolokhov's
shirt.

"I  say,  this  is  folly!  He'll  be  killed,"  said  this
more  sensible  man.

Anatole  stopped  him.

"Don't  touch  him!  You'll  startle  him  and
then  he'll  be  killed.  Eh?  ...  What  then?  .  .  .
Eh?"

D61okhov  turned  round  and,  again  holding
on  with  both  hands,  arranged  himself  on  his
scat.

"If  anyone  comes  meddling  again,"  said  he,
emitting  the  words  separately  through  his  thin
compressed  lips,  "I  willthrowhim  down  there.
Now  then!"

Saying  this  he  again  turned  round,  dropped
his  hands,  took  the  bottle  and  lifted  it  to  his
lips,  threw  back  his  head,  and  raised  his  free
hand  to  balance  himself.  One  of  the  footmen
who  had  stooped  to  pick  up  some  broken  glass
remained  in  that  position  without  taking  his
eyes  from  the  window  and  from  D61okhov's
back.  Anatole  stood  erect  with  staring  eyes.
The  Englishman  looked  on  sideways,  pursing
up  his  lips.  The  man  who  had  wished  to  stop
the  affair  ran  to  a  corner  of  the  room  and
threw  himself  on  a  sofa  with  his  face  to  the
wall.  Pierre  hid  his  face,  from  which  a  faint
smile  forgot  to  fade  though  his  features  now
expressed  horror  and  fear.  All  were  still.  Pierre
took  his  hands  from  his  eyes.  Dolokhov  still
sat  in  the  same  position,  only  his  head  was
thrown  further  back  till  his  curly  hair  touched
his  shirt  collar,  and  the  hand  holding  the  bot-
tle was  lifted  higher  and  higher  and  trembled
with  the  effort.  The  bottle  was  emptying  per-
ceptibly and  rising  still  higher  and  his  head
tilting  yet  further  back.  "Why  is  it  so  long?"
thought  Pierre.  It  seemed  to  him  that  more
than  half  an  hour  had  elapsed.  Suddenly  D6-
lokhov  made  a  backward  movement  with  his


i8


WAR  AND  PEACE


spine,  and  his  arm  trembled  nervously;  this
was  sufficient  to  cause  his  whole  body  to  slip  as
he  sat  on  the  sloping  ledge.  As  he  began  slip-
ping down,  his  head  and  arm  wavered  still
more  with  the  strain.  One  hand  moved  as  if  to
clutch  the  window  sill,  but  refrained  from
touching  it.  Pierre  again  covered  his  eyes  and
thought  he  would  never  open  them  again.  Sud-
denly he  was  aware  of  a  stir  all  around.  He
looked  up:  D61okhov  was  standing  on  the  win-
dow sill,  with  a  pale  but  radiant  face.
"It's  empty!"

He  threw  the  bottle  to  the  Englishman,  who
caught  it  neatly.  D61okhov  jumped  down.  He
smelt  strongly  of  rum.

"Well  done!  .  .  .  Fine  fellow!  .  .  .  There's  a
bet  for  you!  .  .  .  Devil  take  you!"  came  from
different  sides.

The  Englishman  took  out  his  purse  and  be-
gan counting  out  the  money.  Drilokhov  stood
frowning  and  did  not  speak.  Pierre  jumped
upon  the  window  sill.

"Gentlemen,  who  wishes  to  bet  with  me?  I'll
do  the  same  thing!"  he  suddenly  cried.  "Even
without  a  bet,  there!  Tell  them  to  bring  me  a

bottle.  I'll  do  it Bring  a  bottle!"

"Let  him  do  it,  let  him  do  it,"  saidD61okhov,
smiling.

"What  next?  Have  you  gone  mad?  .  .  .  No
one  would  let  you! . . .  Why,  you  go  giddy  even
on  a  staircase,"  exclaimed  several  voices.

"I'll  drink  it!  Let's  have  a  bottle  of  rum!"
shouted  Pierre,  banging  the  table  with  a  deter-
mined and  drunken  gesture  and  preparing  to
climb  out  of  the  window.

They  seized  him  by  his  arms;  but  he  was  so
strong  that  everyone  who  touched  him  was
sent  flying.

"No,  you'll  never  manage  him  that  way,"
said  Anatole.  "Wait  a  bit  and  I'll  get  round
him.  .  .  .  Listen!  I'll  take  your  bet  tomorrow,
but  now  we  are  all  going  to  —  V

"Come  on  then,"  cried  Pierre.  "Come  on!
. . .  And  we'll  take  Bruin  with  us."

And  he  caught  the  bear,  took  it  in  his  arms,
lifted  it  from  the  ground,  and  began  dancing
round  the  room  with  it.

CHAPTER  X

PRINCE  Vxsiii  kept  the  promise  he  had  given
to  Princess  Drubetskaya  who  had  spoken  to
him  on  behalf  of  her  only  son  Boris  on  the
evening  of  Anna  Pdvlovna's  soiree.  The  mat-
ter was  mentioned  to  the  Emperor,  an  excep-
tion made,  and  Boris  transferred  into  the  regi-
ment of  Semenov  Guards  with  the  rank  of  cor-


net. He  received,  however,  no  appointment
to  Kuctiizov's  staff  despite  all  Anna  Mikhay-
lovna's  endeavors  and  entreaties.  Soon  after
Anna  Pdvlovna's  reception  Anna  Mikhdylovna
returned  to  Moscow  and  went  straight  to  her
rich  relations,  the  Rost6vs,  with  whom  she
stayed  when  in  the  town  and  where  her  darling
B6ry,  who  had  only  just  entered  a  regiment  of
the  line  and  was  being  at  once  transferred  to
the  Guards  as  a  cornet,  had  been  educated
from  childhood  and  lived  for  years  at  a  time.
The  Guards  had  already  left  Petersburg  on  the
tenth  of  August,  and  her  son,  who  had  re-
mained in  Moscow  for  his  equipment,  was  to
join  them  on  the  march  to  Radzivilov.

It  was  St.  Natalia's  day  and  the  name  day  of
two  of  the  Rost6vs— the  mother  and  the  young-
est daughter— both  named  Nataly.  Ever  since
the  morning,  carriages  with  six  horses  had  been
coming  and  going  continually,  bringing  visi-
tors to  the  Countess  Rost6va's  big  house  on  the
Povarskaya,  so  well  known  to  all  Moscow.  The
countess  herself  and  her  handsome  eldest
daughter  were  in  the  drawing-room  with  the
visitors  who  came  to  congratulate,  and  who
constantly  succeeded  one  another  in  relays.

The  countess  was  a  woman  of  about  forty-
five,  with  a  thin  Oriental  type  of  face,  evidently
worn  out  with  childbearing— she  had  had
twelve.  A  languor  of  motion  and  speech,  re-
sulting from  weakness,  gave  her  a  distinguished
air  which  inspired  respect.  Princess  Anna  Mi-
kMylovna  Drubetskdya,  who  as  a  member  of
the  household  was  also  seated  in  the  drawing
room,  helped  to  receive  and  entertain  the  visi-
tors. The  young  people  were  in  one  of  the
inner  rooms,  not  considering  it  necessary  to
take  part  in  receiving  the  visitors.  The  count
met  the  guests  and  saw  them  off,  inviting  them
all  to  dinner.

"I  am  very,  very  grateful  to  you,  mon  cher"  or
"ma  ch£re"— he  called  everyone  without  excep-
tion and  without  the  slightest  variation  in  his
tone,  "my  dear,"  whether  they  were  above  or
below  him  in  rank— "I  thank  you  for  myself
and  for  our  two  dear  ones  whose  name  day
we  are  keeping.  But  mind  you  come  to  dinner
or  I  shall  be  offended,  ma  chtre!  On  behalf  of
the  whole  family  I  beg  you  to  come,  mon  cher!"
These  words  he  repeated  to  everyone  without
exception  or  variation,  and  with  the  same  ex-
pression on  his  full,  cheerful,  clean-shaven
face,  the  same  firm  pressure  of  the  hand  and
the  same  quick,  repeated  bows.  As  soon  as  he
had  seen  a  visitor  off  he  returned  to  one  of
those  who  were  still  in  the  drawing  room,


BOOK  ONE


drew  a  chair  toward  him  or  her,  and  jauntily
spreading  out  his  legs  and  putting  hi£  hands
on  his  knees  with  the  air  of  a  man  who  enjoys
life  and  knows  how  to  live,  he  swayed  to  and
fro  with  dignity,  offered  surmises  about  the
weather,  or  touched  on  questions  of  health,
sometimes  in  Russian  and  sometimes  in  very
bad  but  self-confident  French;  then  again,  like
a  man  weary  but  unflinching  in  the  fulfillment
of  duty,  he  rose  to  see  some  visitors  off  and,
stroking  his  scanty  gray  hairs  over  his  bald
patch,  also  asked  them  to  dinner.  Sometimes
on  his  way  back  from  the  anteroom  he  would
pass  through  the  conservatory  and  pantry  into
the  large  marble  dining  hall,  where  tables  were
being  set  out  for  eighty  people;  and  looking
at  the  footmen,  who  were  bringing  in  silver
and  china,  moving  tables,  and  unfolding  dam-
ask table  linen,  he  would  call  Dmitri  Vasfle-
vich,  a  man  of  good  family  and  the  manager  of
all  his  affairs,  and  while  looking  with  pleasure
at  the  enormous  table  would  say:  "Well,
Dmitri,  you'll  see  that  things  are  all  as  they
should  be?  That's  right!  The  great  thing  is  the
serving,  that's  it."  And  with  a  complacent  sigh
he  would  return  to  the  drawing  room.

"M£rya  Lv6vna  Kardgina  and  her  daugh-
ter!" announced  the  countess'  gigantic  foot-
man in  his  bass  voice,  entering  the  drawing
room.  The  countess  reflected  a  moment  and
took  a  pinch  from  a  gold  snuffbox  with  her
husband's  portrait  on  it.

"I'm  quite  worn  out  by  these  callers.  How-
ever, I'll  see  her  and  no  more.  She  is  so  affected.
Ask  her  in,"  she  said  to  the  footman  in  a  sad
voice,  as  if  saying  :  "Very  well,  finish  me  off."

A  tall,  stout,  and  proud-looking  woman,  with
a  round-faced  smiling  daughter,  entered  the
drawing  room,  their  dresses  rustling.

"Dear  Countess,  what  an  age  .  .  .  She  has
been  laid  up,  poor  child  ...  at  the  Razum6v-
ski's  ball . . .  and  Countess  Aprdksina  ...  I  was
so  delighted  ..."  came  the  sounds  of  animated
feminine  voices,  interrupting  one  another  and
mingling  with  the  rustling  of  dresses  and  the
scraping  of  chairs.  Then  one  of  those  conver-
sations began  which  last  out  until,  at  the  first
pause,  the  guests  rise  with  a  rustle  of  dresses
and  say,  "I  am  so  delighted  .  .  .  Mamma's
health  .  .  .  and  Countess  Apraksina  .  .  ."  and
then,  again  rustling,  pass  into  the  anteroom,
put  on  cloaks  or  mantles,  and  drive  away.  The
conversation  was  on  the  chief  topic  of  the  day:
the  illness  of  the  wealthy  and  celebrated  beau
of  Catherine's  day,  Count  Bezukhov,and  about
his  illegitimate  son  Pierre,  the  one  who  had


behaved  so  improperly  at  Anna  Pdvlovna's  re-
ception.

"I  am  so  sorry  for  the  poor  count,"  said  the
visitor.  "He  is  in  such  bad  health,  and  now  this
vexation  about  his  son  is  enough  to  kill  him!"

"What  is  that?"  asked  the  countess  as  if  she
did  not  know  what  the  visitor  alluded  to,
though  she  had  already  heard  about  the  cause
of  Count  Bezrikhov's  distress  some  fifteen  times.

"That's  what  comes  of  a  modern  educa-
tion," exclaimed  the  visitor.  "It  seems  that
while  he  was  abroad  this  young  man  was  al-
lowed to  do  as  he  liked,  and  now  in  Petersburg
I  hear  he  has  been  doing  such  terrible  things
that  he  has  been  expelled  by  the  police."

"You  don't  say  so!"  replied  the  countess.

"He  chose  his  friends  badly,"  interposed
Anna  Mikhaylovna.  "Prince  Vasili's  son,  he,
and  a  certain  Dolokhov  have,  it  is  said,  been
up  to  heaven  only  knows  what!  And  they  have
had  to  suffer  for  it.  D61okhov  has  been  de-
graded to  the  ranks  and  Bezukhov's  son  sent
back  to  Moscow.  Anatole  Kurdgin's  father
managed  somehow  to  get  his  son's  affair
hushed  up,  but  even  he  was  ordered  out  of
Petersburg."

"But  what  have  they  been  up  to?"  asked  the
countess.

"They  are  regular  brigands,  especially  D6-
lokhov,"  replied f the  visitor.  "He  is  a  son  of
Mdrya  Ivdnovna"  D6tpkhova,  such  a  worthy
woman,  but  there,  just  fancy!  Those  three  got
hold  of  a  bear  somewhere,  put  it  in  a  carriage,
and  set  off  with  it  to  visit  some  actresses!  The
police  tried  to  interfere,  and  what  did  the
young  men  do?  They  tied  a  policeman  and  the
bear  back  to  back  and  put  the  bear  into  the
Moyka  Canal.  And  there  was  the  bear  swim-
ming about  with  the  policeman  on  his  back!"

"What  a  nice  figure  the  policeman  must
have  cut,  my  dear!"  shouted  the  count,  dying
with  laughter,

"Oh,  how  dreadful!  How  can  you  laugh  at
it,  Count?"

Yet  the  ladies  themselves  could  not  help
laughing.

"It  was  all  they  could  do  to  rescue  the  poor
man,"  continued  the  visitor.  "And  to  think  it
is  Cyril  Vladimirovich  Bezukhov's  son  who
amuses  himself  in  this  sensible  manner!  And
he  was  said  to  be  so  well  educated  and  clever.
This  is  all  that  his  foreign  education  has  done
for  him!  I  hope  that  here  in  Moscow  no  one
will  receive  him,  in  spite  of  his  money.  They
wanted  to  introduce  him  to  me,  but  I  quite
declined:  I  have  my  daughters  to  consider."


2O


WAR  AND  PEACE


"Why  do  you  say  this  young  man  is  so  rich?"
asked  die  countess,  turning  away  from  the
girls,  who  at  once  assumed  an  air  of  inatten-
tion. "His  children  are  all  illegitimate.  I  drink
Pierre  also  is  illegitimate."

The  visitor  made  a  gesture  with  her  hand.

"I  should  think  he  has  a  score  of  them."

Princess  Anna  MikMylovna  intervened  in
the  conversation,  evidently  wishing  to  show
her  connections  and  knowledge  of  what  went
on  in  society.

"The  fact  of  the  matter  is,"  said  she  signifi-
cantly, and  also  in  a  half  whisper,  "everyone
knows  Count  Cyril's  reputation.  ...  He  has
lost  count  of  his  children,  but  this  Pierre  was
his  favorite."

"How  handsome  the  old  man  still  was  only
a  year  ago!"  remarked  the  countess.  "I  have
never  seen  a  handsomer  man."

"He  is  very  much  altered  now,"  said  Anna
Mikhaylovna.  "Well,  as  I  was  saying,  Prince
Vasili  is  the  next  heir  through  his  wife,  but
the  count  is  very  fond  of  Pierre,  looked  after
his  education,  and  wrote  to  the  Emperor  about
him;  so  that  in  the  case  of  his  death— and  he  is
so  ill  that  he  may  die  at  any  moment,  and  Dr.
Lorrain  has  come  from  Petersburg— no  one
knows  who  will  inherit  his  immense  fortune,
Pierre  or  Prince  Vasili.  Forty  thousand  serfs
and  millions  of  rubles!  I  know  it  all  very  well
for  Prince  Vasili  told  me  himself.  Besides,
Cyril  Vladimirovich  is  my  mother's  second
cousin.  He's  also  my  B6ry's  godfather,"  she
added,  as  if  she  attached  no  importance  at  all
to  the  fact.

"Prince  Vasili  arrived  in  Moscow  yesterday.
I  hear  he  has  come  on  some  inspection  busi-
ness," remarked  the  visitor.

"Yes,  but  between  ourselves,"  said  the  prin-
cess, "that  is  a  pretext.  The  fact  is  he  has  come
to  see  Count  Cyril  Vladimirovich,  hearing  how
ill  he  is."

"But  do  you  know,  my  dear,  that  was  a  capi-
tal joke,"  said  the  count;  and  seeing  that  the
elder  visitor  was  not  listening,  he  turned  to
the  young  ladies.  "I  can  just  imagine  what  a
funny  figure  that  policeman  cut!"

And  as  he  waved  his  arms  to  impersonate
the  policeman,  his  portly  form  again  shook
with  a  deep  ringing  laugh,  the  laugh  of  one
who  always  eats  well  and,  in  particular,  drinks
well.  "So  do  come  and  dine  with  usl"  he  said.

CHAPTER  XI

SILENCE  ENSUED.  The  countess  looked  at  her
callers,  smiling  affably,  but  not  concealing  the


fact  that  she  would  not  be  distressed  if  they
now  r<»,se  and  took  their  leave.  The  visitor's
daughter  was  already  smoothing  down  her
dress  with  an  inquiring  look  at  her  mother,
when  suddenly  from  the  next  room  were  heard
the  footsteps  of  boys  and  girls  running  to  the
door  and  the  noise  of  a  chair  falling  over,  and
a  girl  of  thirteen,  hiding  something  in  the
folds  of  her  short  muslin  frock,  darted  in  and
stopped  short  in  the  middle  of  the  room.  It
was  evident  that  she  had  not  intended  her
flight  to  bring  her  so  far.  Behind  Her  in  the  door-
way appeared  a  student  with  a  crimson  coat
collar,  an  officer  of  the  Guards,  a  girl  of  fifteen,
and  a  plump  rosy-faced  boy  in  a  short  jacket.

The  count  jumped  up  and,  swaying  from
side  to  side,  spread  his  arms  wide  and  threw
them  round  the  little  girl  who  had  run  in.

"Ah,  here  she  is!"  he  exclaimed  laughing.
"My  pet,  whose  name  day  it  is.  My  dear  pet!"

"Ma  chtre,  there  is  a  time  for  everything,"
said  the  countess  with  feigned  severity.  "You
spoil  her,  Ilya,"  she  added,  turning  to  her  hus-
band.

"How  do  you  do,  my  dear?  I  wish  you  many
happy  returns  of  your  name  day,"  said  the
visitor.  "What  a  charming  child,"  she  added,
addressing  the  mother.

This  black-eyed,  wide-mouthed  girl,  not
pretty  but  full  of  life— with  childish  bare
shoulders  which  after  her  run  heaved  and
shook  her  bodice,  with  black  curls  tossed  back-
ward, thin  bare  arms,  little  legs  in  lace-frilled
drawers,  and  feet  in  low  slippers— was  just  at
that  charming  age  when  a  girl  is  no  longer  a
child,  though  the  child  is  not  yet  a  young
woman.  Escaping  from  her  father  she  ran  to
hide  her  flushed  face  in  the  lace  of  her  mother's
mantilla— not  paying  the  least  attention  to
her  severe  remark— and  began  to  laugh.  She
laughed,  and  in  fragmentary  sentences  tried
to  explain  about  a  doll  which  she  produced
from  the  folds  of  her  frock.

"Do  you  see?  .  .  .  My  doll  .  .  .  Mimi  .  .  .  You
see  .  .  ."  was  all  Natasha  managed  to  utter  (to
her  everything  seemed  funny).  She  leaned
against  her  mother  and  burst  into  such  a  loud,
ringing  fit  of  laughter  that  even  the  prim  visi-
tor could  not  help  joining  in.

"Now  then,  go  a  way  and  take  your  monstros-
ity with  you,"  said  the  mother,  pushing  away
her  daughter  with  pretended  sternness,  and
turning  to  the  visitor  she  added:  "She  is  my
youngest  girl."

Natdsha,  raising  her  face  for  a  moment  from
her  mother's  mantilla,  glanced  up  at  her


through  tears  of  laughter,  and  again  hid  her
face.

The  visitor,  compelled  to  look  on  at  this
family  scene,  thought  it  necessary  to  take  some
part  in  it.

"Tell  me,  my  dear,"  said  she  to  Natasha,
"is  Mimi  a  relation  of  yours?  A  daughter,  I
suppose?"

Natdsha  did  not  like  the  visitor's  tone  of
condescension  to  childish  things.  She  did  not
reply,  but  looked  at  her  seriously.

Meanwhile  the  younger  generation:  Boris,
the  officer,  Anna  Mikhdylovna's  son;  Nicholas,
the  undergraduate,  the  count's  eldest  son;
S6nya,  the  count's  fifteen-year-old  niece,  and
little  P^tya,  his  youngest  boy,  had  all  settled
down  in  the  drawing  room  and  were  obviously
trying  to  restrain  within  the  bounds  of  de-
corum the  excitement  and  mirth  that  shone  in
all  their  faces.  Evidently  in  the  back  rooms,
from  which  they  had  dashed  out  so  impetu-
ously, the  conversation  had  been  more  amus-
ing than  the  drawing-room  talk  of  society  scan-
dals, the  weather,  and  Countess  Apraksina.
Now  and  then  they  glanced  at  one  another,
hardly  able  to  suppress  their  laughter.

The  two  young  men,  the  student  and  the
officer,  friends  from  childhood,  were  of  the
same  age  and  both  handsome  fellows,  though
not  alike.  Boris  was  tall  and  fair,  and  his  calm
and  handsome  face  had  regular,  delicate  fea-
tures. Nicholas  was  short  with  curly  hair  and
an  open  expression.  Dark  hairs  were  already
showing  on  his  upper  lip,  and  his  whole  face
expressed  impetuosity  and  enthusiasm.  Nicho-
las blushed  when  he  entered  the  drawingroom.
He  evidently  tried  to  find  something  to  say,
but  failed.  Boris  on  the  contrary  at  once  found
his  footing,  and  related  quietly  and  humor-
ously how  he  had  known  that  doll  Mimi  when
she  was  still  quite  a  young  lady,  before  her  nose
was  broken;  how  she  had  aged  during  the  five
years  he  had  known  her,  and  how  her  head
had  cracked  right  across  the  skull.  Having  said
this  he  glanced  at  Natdsha.  She  turned  away
from  him  and  glanced  at  her  younger  brother,
who  was  screwing  up  his  eyes  and  shaking
with  suppressed  laughter,  and  unable  to  con-
trol herself  any  longer,  she  jumped  up  and
rushed  from  the  room  as  fast  as  her  nimble
little  feet  would  carry  her.  Boris  did  not  laugh.

"You  were  meaning  to  go  out,  weren't  you,
Mamma?  Do  you  want  the  carriage?"  he  asked
his  mother  with  a  smile.

"Yes,  yes,  go  and  tell  them  to  get  it  ready/'
she  answered,  returning  his  smile.


BOOK  ONE  21

Boris  quietly  left  the  room  and  went  in
search  of  Natasha.  The  plump  boy  ran  after
them  angrily,  as  if  vexed  that  their  program
had  been  disturbed.

THE  ONLY  young  people  remaining  in  the
drawing  room,  not  counting  the  young  lady
visitor  and  the  countess'  eldest  daughter  (who
was  four  years  older  than  her  sister  and  be-
haved already  like  a  grown-up  person),  were
Nicholas  and  S6nya,  the  niece.  S6nya  was  a
slender  little  brunette  with  a  tender  look  in
her  eyes  which  were  veiled  by  long  lashes,
thick  black  plaits  coiling  twice  round  her  head,
and  a  tawny  tint  in  her  complexion  and  espe-
cially in  the  color  of  her  slender  but  graceful
and  muscular  arms  and  neck.  By  the  grace  of
her  movements,  by  the  softness  and  flexibility
of  her  small  limbs,  and  by  a  certain  coyness
and  reserve  of  manner,  she  reminded  one  of  a
pretty,  half-grown  kitten  which  promises  to
become  a  beautiful  little  cat.  She  evidently
considered  it  proper  to  show  an  interest  in  the
general  conversation  by  smiling,  but  in  spite
of  herself  her  eyes  under  their  thick  long  lashes
watched  her  cousin  who  was  going  to  join  the
army,  with  such  passionate  girlish  adoration
that  her  smile  could  not  for  a  single  instant
impose  upon  anyone,  and  it  was  clear  that  the
kitten  had  settled  down  only  to  spring  up  with
more  energy  and  again  play  with  her  cousin
as  soon  as  they  too  could,  like  Natdsha  and
Boris,  escape  from  the  drawing  room.

"Ah  yes,  my  dear,"  said  the  count,  addressing
the  visitor  and  pointing  to  Nicholas,  "his
friend  Borfs  has  become  an  officer,  and  so  for
friendship's  sake  he  is  leaving  the  university
and  me,  his  old  father,  and  entering  the  mili-
tary service,  my  dear.  And  there  was  a  place
and  everything  waiting  for  him  in  the  Archives
Department!  Isn't  that  friendship?"  remarked
the  count  in  an  inquiring  tone.

"But  they  say  that  war  has  been  declared,"
replied  the  visitor.

"They've  been  saying  so  a  long  while,"  said
the  count,  "and  they'll  say  so  again  and  again,
and  that  will  be  the  end  of  it.  My  dear,  there's
friendship  for  you,"  he  repeated.  "He's  join-
ing the  hussars."

The  visitor,  not  knowing  what  to  say,  shook
her  head.

"It's  not  at  all  from  friendship,"  declared
Nicholas,  flaring  up  and  turning  away  as  it
from  a  shameful  aspersion.  "It  is  not  from
friendship  at  all;  I  simply  feel  that  the  army  is
my  vocation."


WAR  AND  PEACE


He  glanced  at  his  cousin  and  the  young  lady
visitor;  and  they  were  both  regarding  him  with
a  smile  of  approbation.

"Schubert,  the  colonel  of  the  Pdvlograd  Hus-
sars, is  dining  with  us  today.  He  has  been  here
on  leave  and  is  taking  Nicholas  back  with  him.
It  can't  be  helped!"  said  the  count,  shrugging
his  shoulders  and  speaking  playfully  of  a  mat-
ter that  evidently  distressed  him.

"I  have  already  told  you,  Papa,"  said  his  son,
"that  if  you  don't  wish  to  let  me  go,  I'll  stay.
But  I  know  I  am  no  use  anywhere  except  in
the  army;  I  am  not  a  diplomat  or  a  govern-
ment clerk.— I  don't  know  how  to  hide  what
I  feel."  As  he  spoke  he  kept  glancing  with  the
flirtatiousness  of  a  handsome  youth  at  S6nya
and  the  young  lady  visitor.

The  little  kitten,  feasting  her  eyes  on  him,
seemed  ready  at  any  moment  to  start  her  gam-
bols again  and  display  her  kittenish  nature.

"All  right,  all  right!"  said  the  old  count.  "He
always  flares  up!  This  Buonaparte  has  turned
all  their  heads;  they  all  think  of  how  he  rose
from  an  ensign  and  became  Emperor.  Well,
well,  God  grant  it,"  he  added,  not  noticing  his
visitor's  sarcastic  smile.

The  elders  began  talking  about  Bonaparte.
Julie  Kardgina  turned  to  young  Rost6v.

"What  a  pity  you  weren't  at  the  Arkharovs'
on  Thursday.  It  was  so  dull  without  you,"  said
she,  giving  him  a  tender  smile.

The  young  man,  flattered,  sat  down  nearer
to  her  with  a  coquettish  smile,  and  engaged
the  smiling  Julie  in  a  confidential  conversa-
tion without  at  all  noticing  that  his  involun-
tary smile  had  stabbed  the  heart  of  S6nya,  who
blushed  and  smiled  unnaturally.  In  the  midst
of  his  talk  he  glanced  round  at  her.  She  gave
him  a  passionately  angry  glance,  and  hardly
able  to  restrain  her  tears  and  maintain  the
artificial  smile  on  her  lips,  she  got  up  and  left
the  room.  All  Nicholas'  animation  vanished.
He  waited  for  the  first  pause  in  the  conversa-
tion, and  then  with  a  distressed  face  left  the
room  to  find  Sony  a.

"How  plainly  all  these  young  people  wear
their  hearts  on  their  sleeves!"  said  Anna  Mi-
khdylovna,  pointing  to  Nicholas  as  he  went
out.  "Cousinage— dangereux  voisinage"1  she
added.

"Yes,"  said  the  countess  when  the  brightness
these  young  people  had  brought  into  the  room
had  vanished;  and  as  if  answering  a  question
no  one  had  put  but  which  was  always  in  her
mind,  "and  how  much  suffering,  how  much

1  Cousin  hood  is  a  dangerous  neighborhood.


anxiety  one  has  had  to  go  through  that  we
might  rejoice  in  them  now!  And  yet  really  the
anxiety  is  greater  now  than  the  joy.  One  is
always,  always  anxious!  Especially  just  at  this
age,  so  dangerous  both  for  girls  and  boys."

"It  all  depends  on  the  bringing  up,"  re-
marked the  visitor.

"Yes,  you're  quite  right,"  continued  the
countess.  "Till  now  I  have  always,  thank  God,
been  my  children's  friend  and  had  their  full
confidence,"  said  she,  repeating  the  mistake  of
so  many  parents  who  imagine  that  their  chil-
dren have  no  secrets  from  them.  "I  know  I
shall  always  be  my  daughters'  first  confidante,
and  that  if  Nicholas,  with  his  impulsive  na-
ture, does  get  into  mischief  (a  boy  can't  help
it),  he  will  all  the  same  never  be  like  those
Petersburg  young  men."

"Yes,  they  are  splendid,  splendid  young-
sters," chimed  in  the  count,  who  always  solved
questions  that  seemed  to  him  perplexing  by
deciding  that  everything  was  splendid.  "Just
fancy:  wants  to  be  an  hussar.  What's  one  to  do,
my  dear?"

"What  a  charming  creature  your  younger
girl  is,"  said  the  visitor;  "a  little  volcano!"

"Yes,  a  regular  volcano,"  said  the  count.
"Takes  after  me!  And  what  a  voice  she  has;
though  she's  my  daughter,  I  tell  the  truth  when
I  say  she'll  be  a  singer,  a  second  Salomoni!  We
have  engaged  an  Italian  to  give  her  lessons."

"Isn't  she  too  young?  I  have  heard  that  it
harms  the  voice  to  train  it  at  that  age."

"Oh  no,  not  at  all  too  young!"  replied  the
count.  "Why,  our  mothers  used  to  be  married
at  twelve  or  thirteen."

"And  she's  in  love  with  Boris  already.  Just
fancy!"  said  the  countess  with  a  gentle  smile,
looking  at  Bon's'  mother,  and  went  on,  evi-
dently concerned  with  a  thought  that  always
occupied  her:  "Now  you  see  if  I  were  to  be
severe  with  her  and  to  forbid  it  ...  goodness
knows  what  they  might  be  up  to  on  the  sly"
(she  meant  that  they  would  be  kissing),  "but
as  it  is,  I  know  every  word  she  utters.  She  will
come  running  to  me  of  her  own  accord  in  the
evening  and  tell  me  everything.  Perhaps  I
spoil  her,  but  really  that  seems  the  best  plan.
With  her  elder  sister  I  was  stricter."

"Yes,  I  was  brought  up  quite  differently,"
remarked  the  handsome  elder  daughter,  Count-
ess Ve*ra,  with  a  smile.

But  the  smile  did  not  enhance  V&ra's  beauty
as  smiles  generally  do;  on  the  contrary  it  gave
her  an  unnatural,  and  therefore  unpleasant,
expression.  Ve*ra  was  good-looking,  not  at  all


BOOK  ONE


stupid,  quick  at  learning,  was  well  brought  up,
and  had  a  pleasant  voice;  what  she  said  was
true  and  appropriate,  yet,  strange  to  say,  every-
one—the visitors  and  countess  alike—turned
to  look  at  her  as  if  wondering  why  she  had  said
it,  and  they  all  felt  awkward.

"People  are  always  too  clever  with  their  eld-
est children  and  try  to  make  something  excep-
tional of  them,"  said  the  visitor.

"What's  the  good  of  denying  it,  my  dear?
Our  dear  countess  was  too  clever  with  Wra,"
said  the  count.  "Well,  what  of  that?  She's
turned  out  splendidly  all  the  same,"  he  added,
winking  at  V^ra.

The  guests  got  up  and  took  their  leave,
promising  to  return  to  dinner.

"What  manners!  I  thought  they  would  never
go,"  said  the  countess,  when  she  had  seen  her
guests  out.

CHAPTER  XIII

WHEN  Natdsha  ran  out  of  the  drawing  room
she  only  went  as  far  as  the  conservatory.  There
she  paused  and  stood  listening  to  the  conver-
sation in  the  drawing  room,  waiting  for  Boris
to  come  out.  She  was  already  growing  impa-
tient, and  stamped  her  foot,  ready  to  cry  at  his
not  coming  at  once,  when  she  heard  the  young
man's  discreet  steps  approaching  neither  quick-
ly nor  slowly.  At  this  Natasha  dashed  swiftly
among  the  flower  tubs  and  hid  there.

Boris  paused  in  the  middle  of  the  room,
looked  round,  brushed  a  little  dust  from  the
sleeve  of  his  uniform,  and  going  up  to  a  mirror
examined  his  handsome  face.  Natdsha,  very
still,  peered  out  from  her  ambush,  waiting  to
see  what  he  would  do.  He  stood  a  little  while
before  the  glass,  smiled,  and  walked  toward
the  other  door.  Natasha  was  about  to  call  him
but  changed  her  mind.  "Let  him  look  for  me,"
thought  she.  Hardly  had  Boris  gone  than
S6nya,  flushed,  in  tears,  and  muttering  angrily,
came  in  at  the  other  door.  Natdsha  checked
her  first  impulse  to  run  out  to  her,  and  re-
mained in  her  hiding  place,  watching— as  un-
der an  invisible  cap— to  see  what  went  on  in  the
world.  She  was  experiencing  a  new  and  pecul-
iar pleasure.  S6nya,  muttering  to  herself,  kept
looking  round  toward  the  drawing-room  door.
It  opened  and  Nicholas  came  in.

"S6nya,  what  is  the  matter  with  you?  How
can  you?"  said  he,  running  up  to  her.

"It's  nothing,  nothing;  leave  me  alone!"
sobbed  S6nya.

"Ah,  I  know  what  it  is."

"Well,  if  you  do,  so  much  the  better,  and


you  can  go  back  to  her!"

"S6-o-onya!  Look  here!  How  can  you  tor-
ture me  and  yourself  like  that,  for  a  mere
fancy?"  said  Nicholas  taking  her  hand.

S6nya  did  not  pull  it  away,  and  left  off  cry-
ing. Natdsha,  not  stirring  and  scarcely  breath-
ing, watched  from  her  ambush  with  sparkling
eyes.  "What  will  happen  now?"  thought  she.

"Sonya!  What  is  anyone  in  the  world  to  me?
You  alone  are  everything!"  said  Nicholas.
"And  I  will  prove  it  to  you."

"I  don't  like  you  to  talk  like  that."

"Well,  then,  I  won't;  only  forgive  me,
S6nya!"  He  drew  her  to  him  and  kissed  her.

"Oh,  how  nice,"  thought  Natdsha;  and  when
S6nya  and  Nicholas  had  gone  out  of  the  con-
servatory she  followed  and  called  Boris  to  her.

"Boris,  come  here,"  said  she  with  a  sly  and
significant  look.  "I  have  something  to  tell  you.
Here,  here!"  and  she  led  him  into  the  conserv-
atory to  the  place  among  the  tubs  where  she
had  been  hiding.

Boris  followed  her,  smiling.

"What  is  the  something?"  asked  he.

She  grew  confused,  glanced  round,  and,  see-
ing the  doll  she  had  thrown  down  on  one  of
the  tubs,  picked  it  up.

"Kiss  the  doll,"  said  she.

Boris  looked  attentively  and  kindly  at  her
eager  face,  but  did  not  reply.

"Don't  you  want  to?  Well,  then,  come  here,"
said  she,  and  went  further  in  among  the  plants
and  threw  down  the  doll.  "Closer,  closer!"  she
whispered.

She  caught  the  young  officer  by  his  cuffs,  and
a  look  of  solemnity  and  fear  appeared  on  her
flushed  face.

"And  me?  Would  you  like  to  kiss  me?"  she
whispered  almost  inaudibly,  glancing  up  at
him  from  under  her  brows,  smiling,  and  al-
most crying  from  excitement.

Boris  blushed.

"How  funny  you  are!"  he  said,  bending
down  to  her  and  blushing  still  more,  but  he
waited  and  did  nothing.

Suddenly  she  jumped  up  onto  a  tub  to  be
higher  than  he,  embraced  him  so  that  both  her
slender  bare  arms  clasped  him  above  his  neck,
and,  tossing  back  her  hair,  kissed  him  full  on
the  lips.

Then  she  slipped  down  among  the  flower-
pots on  the  other  side  of  the  tubs  and  stood,
hanging  her  head.

"Natdsha,"  he  said,  "you  know  that  I  love
you,  but . .  ."

"You  are  in  love  with  me?"  Natdsha  broke  in.


24

"Yes,  I  am,  but  please  don't  let  us  do  like
that.  ...  In  another  four  years  . . .  then  I  will
ask  for  your  hand."

Natasha  considered.

"Thirteen,  fourteen,  fifteen,  sixteen,"  she
counted  on  her  slender  little  fingers.  "All  rightl
Then  it's  settled?"

A  smile  of  joy  and  satisfaction  lit  up  her
eager  face.

"Settled!"  replied  Boris.

"Forever?"  said  the  little  girl.  "Till  death
itself?"

She  took  his  arm  and  with  a  happy  face  went
with  him  into  the  adjoining  sitting  room.


CHAPTER  XIV

AFTER  RECEIVING  her  visitors,  the  countess  was
so  tired  that  she  gave  orders  to  admit  no  more,
but  the  porter  was  told  to  be  sure  to  invite  to
dinner  all  who  came  "to  congratulate."  The
countess  wished  to  have  a  te'te-a-te'te  talk  with
the  friend  of  her  childhood,  Princess  Anna
Mikhdylovna,  whom  she  had  not  seen  properly
since  she  returned  from  Petersburg.  Anna
Mikhiylovna,  with  her  tear- worn  but  pleasant
face,  drew  her  chair  nearer  to  that  of  the
countess.

"With  you  I  will  be  quite  frank,"  said  Anna
MikMylovna.  "There  are  not  many  left  of  us
old  friends!  That's  why  I  so  value  your  friend-
ship."

Anna  Mikhdylovna  looked  at  Wra  and
paused.  The  countess  pressed  her  friend's  hand.

"Wra,"  she  said  to  her  eldest  daughter  who
was  evidently  not  a  favorite,  "how  is  it  you
have  so  little  tact?  Don't  you  see  you  are  not
wanted  here?  Go  to  the  other  girls,  or  ..."

The  handsome  Wra  smiled  contemptuously
but  did  not  seem  at  all  hurt.

"If  you  had  told  me  sooner,  Mamma,  I  would
have  gone,"  she  replied  as  she  rose  to  go  to  her
own  room.

But  as  she  passed  the  sitting  room  she  no-
ticed two  couples  sitting,  one  pair  at  each  win-
dow. She  stopped  and  smiled  scornfully.  S6nya
was  sitting  close  to  Nicholas  who  was  copying
out  some  verses  for  her,  the  first  he  had  ever
written.  Boris  and  Natdsha  were  at  the  other
window  and  ceased  talking  when  Wra  entered.
S6nya  and  Natasha  looked  at  Wra  with  guilty,
happy  faces.

It  was  pleasant  and  touching  to  see  these
little  girls  in  love;  but  apparently  the  sight  of
them  roused  no  pleasant  feeling  in  Wra.

"How  often  have  I  asked  you  not  to  take
my  things?"  she  said.  "You  have  a  room  of  your


WAR  AND  PEACE

own,"(and  she  took  the  inkstand  from  Nicholas.

"In  a  minute,  in  a  minute,"  he  said,  dipping
his  pen.

"You  always  manage  to  do  things  at  the
wrong  time,"  continued  Wra.  "You  came
rushing  into  the  drawing  room  so  that  every-
one felt  ashamed  of  you."

Though  what  she  said  was  quite  just,  per-
haps for  that  very  reason  no  one  replied,  and
the  four  simply  looked  at  one  another.  She
lingered  in  the  room  with  the  inkstand  in  her
hand.

"And  at  your  age  what  secrets  can  there  be
between  Natdsha  and  Boris,  or  between  you
two?  It's  all  nonsense!"

"Now,  Wra,  what  does  it  matter  to  you?"
said  Natasha  in  defense,  speaking  very  gently.

She  seemed  that  day  to  be  more  than  ever
kind  and  affectionate  to  everyone.

"Very  silly,"  said  Wra.  "I  am  ashamed  of
you.  Secrets  indeed!"

"All  have  secrets  of  their  own,"  answered
Natasha,  getting  warmer.  "We  don't  interfere
with  you  and  Berg."

"I  should  think  not,"  said  Wra,  "because
there  can  never  be  anything  wrong  in  my  be-
havior. But  I'll  just  tell  Mamma  how  you  are
behaving  with  Boris."

"Nat£lyallynichna  behaves  very  well  to  me,"
remarked  Boris.  "I  have  nothing  to  complain
of."

"Don't,  Boris!  You  are  such  a  diplomat  that
it  is  really  tiresome,"  said  Natasha  in  a  morti-
fied voice  that  trembled  slightly.  (She  used
the  word  "diplomat,"  which  was  just  then  much
in  vogue  among  the  children,  in  the  special
sense  they  attached  to  it.)  "Why  does  she
bother  me?"  And  she  added,  turning  to  Wra,
"You'll  never  understand  it,  because  you've
never  loved  anyone.  You  have  no  heart!  You
are  a  Madame  de  Genlis1  and  nothing  more"
(this  nickname,  bestowed  on  Wra  by  Nicholas,
was  considered  very  stinging),  "and  your  great-
est pleasure  is  to  be  unpleasant  to  people!  Go
and  flirt  with  Berg  as  much  as  you  please,"  she
finished  quickly.

"I  shall  at  any  rate  not  run  after  a  young
man  before  visitors ..."

"Well,  now  you've  done  what  you  wanted,"
put  in  Nicholas— "said  unpleasant  things  to
everyone  and  upset  them.  Let's  go  to  the  nurs-
ery."

All  four,  like  a  flock  of  scared  birds,  got  up
and  left  the  room.


*A  French  writer  of  that  period,  authoress  of
educational  works  and  novels.— TR.


BOOK  ONE


"The  unpleasant  things  were  said  t<j  me,"
remarked  Vera,  "I  said  none  to  anyone."

"Madame  de  Genlis!  Madame  de  GenlisI"
shouted  laughing  voices  through  the  door.

The  handsome  Vdra,  who  produced  such  an
irritating  and  unpleasant  effect  on  everyone,
smiled  and,  evidently  unmoved  by  what  had
been  said  to  her,  went  to  the  looking  glass  and
arranged  her  hair  and  scarf.  Looking  at  her
own  handsome  face  she  seemed  to  become  still
colder  and  calmer.

In  the  drawing  room  the  conversation  was
still  going  on.

"Ah,  my  dear,"  said  the  countess,  "my  life
is  not  all  roses  either.  Don't  I  know  that  at  the
rate  we  are  living  our  means  won't  last  long?
It's  all  the  Club  and  his  easygoing  nature.  Even
in  the  country  do  we  get  any  rest?  Theatricals,
hunting,  and  heaven  knows  what  besides!  But
don't  let's  talk  about  me;  tell  me  how  you
managed  every th  ing.  I  often  wonder  at  you,
Annette— how  at  your  age  you  can  rush  off
alone  in  a  carriage  to  Moscow,  to  Petersburg,
to  those  ministers  and  great  people,  and  know
how  to  deal  with  them  all!  It's  quite  astonish-
ing. How  did  you  get  things  settled?  I  couldn't
possibly  do  it."

"Ah,  my  love,"  answered  Anna  Mikhaylovna,
"God  grant  you  never  know  what  it  is  to  be
left  a  widow  without  means  and  with  a  son
you  love  to  distraction!  One  learns  many  things
then,"  she  added  with  a  certain  pride.  "That
lawsuit  taught  me  much.  When  I  want  to  see
one  of  those  big  people  I  write  a  note:  'Prin-
cess So-and-So  desires  an  interview  with  So-
and-So,'  and  then  I  take  a  cab  and  go  myself
two,  three,  or  four  times— till  I  get  what  I  want.
I  don't  mind  what  they  think  of  me."

"Well,  and  to  whom  did  you  apply  about
Bory?"  asked  the  countess.  "You  see  yours  is
already  an  officer  in  the  Guards,  while  my
Nicholas  is  going  as  a  cadet.  There's  no  one  to
interest  himself  for  him.  To  whom  did  you
apply?"

"To  Prance  Vasfli.  He  was  so  kind.  He  at
once  agreed  to  everything,  and  put  the  matter
before  the  Emperor,"  said  Princess  Anna  Mi-
khdylovna  enthusiastically,  quite  forgetting  all
the  humiliation  she  had  endured  to  gain  her
end.

"Has  Prince  Vasfli  aged  much?"  asked  the
•countess.  "I  have  not  seen  him  since  we  acted
together  at  the  Rumydntsovs'  theatricals.  I  ex-
pect he  has  forgotten  me.  He  paid  me  attentions
in  those  days,"  said  the  countess,  with  a  smile.


"He  is  just  the  same  as  ever,"  replied  Anna
Mikhdylovna,  "overflowing  with  amiability.
His  position  has  not  turned  his  head  at  all.  He
said  to  me,  'I  am  sorry  I  can  do  so  little  for
you,  dear  Princess.  I  am  at  your  command.'
Yes,  he  is  a  fine  fellow  and  a  very  kind  rela-
tion. But,  Nataly,  you  know  my  love  for  my
son:  I  would  do  anything  for  his  happiness!
And  my  affairs  are  in  such  a  bad  way  that  my
position  is  now  a  terrible  one,"  continued
Anna  Mikhaylovna,  sadly,  dropping  her  voice.
"My  wretched  lawsuit  takes  all  I  have  and
makes  no  progress.  Would  you  believe  it,  I
have  literally  not  a  penny  and  don't  know  how
to  equip  Boris."  She  took  out  her  handkerchief
and  began  to  cry.  "I  need  five  hundred  rubles,
and  have  only  one  twenty-five-ruble  note.  I
am  in  such  a  state.  .  .  .  My  only  hope  now  is
in  Count  Cyril  Vladimirovich  Beziikhov.  If  he
will  not  assist  his  godson— you  know  he  is  Bory's
godfather— and  allow  him  something  for  his
maintenance,  all  my  trouble  will  have  been
thrown  away.  ...  I  shall  not  be  able  to  equip
him."

The  countess'  eyes  filled  with  tears  and  she
pondered  in  silence.

"I  often  think,  though,  perhaps  it's  a  sin,"
said  the  princess,  "that  here  lives  Count  Cyril
Vladfmirovith  Beziikhov  so  rich,  all  alone  .  .  .
that  tremendous  fortune  .  .  .  and  what  is  his
life  worth?  It's  a  burden  to  him,  and  B6ry's
life  is  only  just  beginning.  .  .  ."

"Surely  he  will  leave  something  to  Boris,"
said  the  countess.

"Heaven  only  knows,  my  dear!  These  rich
grandees  are  so  selfish.  Still,  I  will  take  Borfs
and  go  to  see  him  at  once,  and  I  shall  speak
to  him  straight  out.  Let  people  think  what  they
will  of  me,  it's  really  all  the  same  to  me  when
my  son's  fate  is  at  stake."  The  princess  rose.
"It's  now  two  o'clock  and  you  dine  at  four.
There  will  just  be  time."

And  like  a  practical  Petersburg  lady  who
knows  how  to  make  the  most  of  time,  Anna
Mikhdylovna  sent  someone  to  call  her  son,
and  went  into  the  anteroom  with  him.

"Good-by,  my  dear,"  said  she  to  the  countess
who  saw  her  to  the  door,  and  added  in  a
whisper  so  that  her  son  should  not  hear,
"Wish  me  good  luck."

"Are  you  going  to  Count  Cyril  Vladfmiro-
vich, my  dear?"  said  the  count  coming  out
from  the  dining  hall  into  the  anteroom,  and
he  added:  "If  he  is  better,  ask  Pierre  to  dine
with  us.  He  has  been  to  the  house,  you  know,
and  danced  with  the  children.  Be  sure  to  in-


WAR  AND  PEACE


vite  him,  my  dear.  We  will  see  how  Tards  dis-
tinguishes himself  today.  He  says  Count  Orl6v
never  gave  such  a  dinner  as  ours  will  bel"

CHAPTER  XV

"Mv  DEAR  Boris,"  said  Princess  Anna  Mikhdy-
lovna  to  her  son  as  Countess  Rost6va's  car-
riage in  which  they  were  seated  drove  over  the
straw-covered  street  and  turned  into  the  wide
courtyard  of  Count  Cyril  Vladfmirovich  Bezu-
khov'shouse.  "My  dear  Boris,"  said  the  mother,
drawing  her  hand  from  beneath  her  old  man-
tle and  laying  it  timidly  and  tenderly  on  her
son's  arm,  "be  affectionate  and  attentive  to
him.  Count  Cyril  Vladimirovich  is  your  god-
father after  all,  and  your  future  depends  on
him.  Remember  that,  my  dear,  and  be  nice  to
him,  as  you  so  well  know  how  to  be."

"If  only  I  knew  that  anything  besides  hu-
miliation would  come  of  it . . ."  answered  her
son  coldly.  "But  I  have  promised  and  will  do
it  for  your  sake."

Although  the  hall  porter  saw  someone's
carriage  standing  at  the  entrance,  after  scru-
tinizing the  mother  and  son  (who  without  ask-
ing to  be  announced  had  passed  straight
through  the  glass  porch  between  the  rows  of
statues  in  niches)  and  looking  significantly  at
the  lady's  old  cloak,  he  asked  whether  they
wanted  the  count  or  the  princesses,  and,  hear-
ing that  they  wished  to  see  the  count,  said  his
excellency  was  worse  today,  and  that  his  excel-
lency was  not  receiving  anyone.

"We  may  as  well  go  back,"  said  the  son  in
French.

"My  dear!"  exclaimed  his  mother  implor-
ingly, again  laying  her  hand  on  his  arm  as  if
that  touch  might  soothe  or  rouse  him.

Boris  said  no  more,  but  looked  inquiringly
at  his  mother  without  taking  off  his  cloak.

"My  friend,"  said  Anna  Mikhlylovna  in
gentle  tones,  addressing  the  hall  porter,  "I
know  Count  Cyril  Vladimirovich  is  very  ill
. . .  that's  why  I  have  come  ...  I  am  a  relation.
I  shall  not  disturb  him,  my  friend  ...  I  only
need  see  Prince  Vasili  Serg^evich:  he  is  stay-
ing here,  is  he  not?  Please  announce  me."

The  hall  porter  sullenly  pulled  a  bell  that
rang  upstairs,  and  turned  away.

"Princess  Drubetskdya  to  see  Prince  Vasili
Serg^evich,"  he  called  to  a  footman  dressed  in
knee  breeches,  shoes,  and  a  swallow-tail  coat,
who  ran  downstairs  and  looked  over  from  the
halfway  landing.

The  mother  smoothed  the  folds  of  her  dyed
silk  dress  before  a  large  Venetian  mirror  in


the  wajl,  and  in  her  trodden-down  shoes  brisk-
ly ascended  the  carpeted  stairs.

"My  dear,"  she  said  to  her  son,  once  more
stimulating  him  by  a  touch,  "you  promised
me!"

The  son,  lowering  his  eyes,  followed  her
quietly.

They  entered  the  large  hall,  from  which  one
of  the  doors  led  to  the  apartments  assigned  to
Prince  Vasili.

Just  as  the  mother  and  son,  having  reached
the  middle  of  the  hall,  were  about  to  ask  their
way  of  an  elderly  footman  who  had  sprung  up
as  they  entered,  the  bronze  handle  of  one  of
the  doors  turned  and  Prince  Vasili  came  out-
wearing a  velvet  coat  with  a  single  star  on  his
breast,  as  was  his  custom  when  at  home— tak-
ing leave  of  a  good-looking,  dark-haired  man.
This  was  the  celebrated  Petersburg  doctor,
Lorrain.

"Then  it  is  certain?"  said  the  prince.

"Prince,  humanum  est  errare,1  but  .  .  ."  re-
plied the  doctor,  swallowing  his  r%  and  pro-
nouncing the  Latin  words  with  a  French  ac-
cent.

"Very  well,  very  well . . ."

Seeing  Anna  Mikhdylovna  and  her  son,
Prince  Vasili  dismissed  the  doctor  with  a  bow
and  approached  them  silently  and  with  a  look
of  inquiry.  The  son  noticed  that  an  expression
of  profound  sorrow  suddenly  clouded  his
mother's  face,  and  he  smiled  slightly.

"Ah,  Prince!  In  what  sad  circumstances  we
meet  again!  And  how  is  our  dear  invalid?"
said  she,  as  though  unaware  of  the  cold  of-
fensive look  fixed  on  her.

Prince  Vasili  stared  at  her  and  at  Boris  ques-
tioningly  and  perplexed.  Boris  bowed  polite-
ly. Prince  Vasili  without  acknowledging  the
bow  turned  to  Anna  Mikhdylovna,  answering
her  query  by  a  movement  of  the  head  and  lips
indicating  very  little  hope  for  the  patient.

"Is  it  possible?"  exclaimed  Anna  Mikhdy-
lovna.  "Oh,  how  awful!  It  is  terrible  to  think.
.  .  .  This  is  my  son,"  she  added,  indicating
Boris.  "He  wanted  to  thank  you  himself."

Boris  bowed  again  politely.  *

"Believe  me,  Prince,  a  mother's  heart  will
never  forget  what  you  have  done  for  us."

"I  am  glad  I  was  able  to  do  you  a  service,  my
dear  Anna  Mikhdylovna,"  said  Prince  Vasili,
arranging  his  lace  frill,  and  in  tone  and  man-
ner, here  in  Moscow  to  Anna  Mikhdylovna
whom  he  had  placed  under  an  obligation,  as-
suming an  air  of  much  greater  importance  than

1  To  err  is  human.


BOOK  ONE


he  had  done  in  Petersburg  at  Anna  Sender's
reception.  f

"Try  to  serve  well  and  show  yourself  worthy,"
added  he,  addressing  Boris  with  severity.  "I
am  glad. . . .  Are  you  here  on  leave?"  he  went
on  in  his  usual  tone  of  indifference.

"I  am  awaiting  orders  to  join  my  new  regi-
ment, your  excellency,"  replied  Boris,  betray-
ing neither  annoyance  at  the  prince's  brusque
manner  nor  a  desire  to  enterinto  conversation,
but  speaking  so  quietly  and  respectfully  that
the  prince  gave  him  a  searching  glance.

"Are  you  living  with  your  mother?"

"I  am  living  at  Countess  Rost6va's,"  replied
Boris,  again  adding,  "your  excellency."

"That  is,  with  Ilyd  Rost6v  who  married  Na-
taly  Shinshina,"  said  Anna  Mikhaylovna.

"I  know,  I  know,"  answered  Prince  Vasili  in
his  monotonous  voice.  "I  never  could  under-
stand how  Nataly  made  up  her  mind  to  marry
that  unlicked  bear!  A  perfectly  absurd  and
stupid  fellow,  and  a  gambler  too,  I  am  told."

"But  a  very  kind  man,  Prince,"  said  Anna
Mikhaylovna  with  a  pathetic  smile,  as  though
she  too  knew  that  Count  Rost6v  deserved  this
censure,  but  asked  him  not  to  be  too  hard  on
the  poor  old  man.  "What  do  the  doctors  say?"
asked  the  princess  after  a  pause,  her  worn  face
again  expressing  deep  sorrow.

"They  give  little  hope,"  replied  the  prince.

"And  I  should  so  like  to  thank  Uncle  once
for  all  his  kindness  to  me  and  Boris.  He  is  his
godson,"  she  added,  her  tone  suggesting  that
this  fact  ought  to  give  Prince  Vasili  much  satis-
faction.

Prince  Vasili  became  thoughtful  and
frowned.  Anna  Mikhdylovna  saw  that  he  was
afraid  of  finding  in  her  a  rival  for  Count  Be-
zukhov's  fortune,  and  hastened  to  reassure  him.

"If  it  were  not  for  my  sincere  affection  and
devotion  to  Uncle"  said  she,  uttering  the  word
with  peculiar  assurance  and  unconcern,  "I
know  his  character:  noble,  upright . . .  but  you
see  he  has  no  one  with  him  except  the  young
princesses.  .  .  .  They  are  still  young.  .  .  ."  She
bent  her  head  and  continued  in  a  whisper:
"Has  he  performed  his  final  duty,  Prince?  How
priceless  are  those  last  moments!  It  can  make
things  no  worse,  and  it  is  absolutely  necessary
to  prepare  him  if  he  is  so  ill.  We  women,  Prince,"
and  she  smiled  tenderly,  "always  know  how  to
say  these  things.  I  absolutely  must  see  him,
however  painful  it  may  be  for  me.  I  am  used  to
suffering."

Evidently  the  prince  understood  her,  and  al-
so understood,  as  he  had  done  at  Anna  Pdvlov-


na's,  that  it  would  be  difficult  to  get  rid  of  Anna
Mikhlylovna.

"Would  not  such  a  meeting  be  too  trying  for
him,  dear  Anna  Mikhdylovna?"  said  he.  "Let
us  wait  until  evening.  The  doctors  are  expect-
ing a  crisis."

"But  one  cannot  delay,  Prince,  at  such  a  mo-
ment! Consider  that  the  welfare  of  his  soul  is
at  stake.  Ah,  it  is  awful:  the  duties  of  a  Chris-
tian . . ."

A  door  of  one  of  the  inner  rooms  opened  and
one  of  the  princesses,  the  count's  niece,  entered
with  a  cold,  stern  face.  The  length  of  her  body
was  strikingly  out  of  proportion  to  her  short
legs.  Prince  Vasili  turned  to  her.

"Well,  how  is  he?"

"Still  the  same;  but  what  can  you  expect,  this
noise  .  .  ."  said  the  princess,  looking  at  Anna
Mikhlylovna  as  at  a  stranger.

"Ah,  my  dear,  I  hardly  knew  you,"  said  Anna
Mikhdylovna  with  a  happy  smile,  ambling
lightly  up  to  the  count's  niece.  "I  have  come,
and  am  at  your  service  to  help  you  nurse  my
uncle.  I  imagine  what  you  have  gone  through,"
and  she  sympathetically  turned  up  her  eyes.

The  princess  gave  no  reply  and  did  not  even
smile,  but  left  the  room  at  once.  Anna  Mikhay-
lovna took  off  her  gloves  and,  occupying  the
position  she  had  conquered,  settled  down  in  an
armchair,  inviting  Prince  Vasfli  to  take  a  seat
beside  her.

"Boris,"  she  said  to  her  son  with  a  smile,  "I
shall  go  in  to  see  the  count,  my  uncle;  but  you,
my  dear,  had  better  go  to  Pierre  meanwhile  and
don't  forget  to  give  him  the  Rost6vs'  invita-
tion. They  ask  him  to  dinner.  I  suppose  he
won't  go?"  she  continued,  turning  to  the  prince.

"On  the  contrary,"  replied  the  prince,  who
had  plainly  become  depressed,  "I  shall  be  only
too  glad  if  you  relieve  me  of  that  young  man.
.  .  .  Here  he  is,  and  the  count  has  not  once
asked  for  him."

He  shrugged  his  shoulders.  A  footman  con-
ducted Boris  down  one  flight  of  stairs  and  up
another,  to  Pierre's  rooms.

CHAPTER  XVI

PIERRE,  after  all,  had  not  managed  to  choose  a
career  for  himself  in  Petersburg,  and  had  been
expelled  from  there  for  riotous  conduct  and
sent  to  Moscow.  The  story  told  about  him  at
Count  Rost6v's  was  true.  Pierre  had  taken  part
in  tying  a  policeman  to  a  bear.  He  had  now
been  for  some  days  in  Moscow  and  was  staying
as  usual  at  his  father's  house.  Though  he  ex-
pected that  the  story  of  his  escapade  would  be


WAR  AND  PEACE


already  known  in  Moscow  and  that  the  ladies
about  his  father— who  were  never  favorably
disposed  toward  him— would  have  used  it  to
turn  the  count  against  him,  he  nevertheless  on
the  day  of  his  arrival  went  to  his  father's  part
of  the  house.  Entering  the  drawing  room,  where
the  princesses  spent  most  of  their  time,  he
greeted  the  ladies,  two  of  whom  were  sitting  at
embroidery  frames  while  a  third  read  aloud.  It
was  the  eldest  who  was  reading— the  one  who
had  met  Anna  Mikhdylovna.  The  two  younger
ones  were  embroidering:  both  were  rosy  and
pretty  and  they  differed  only  in  that  one  had  a
little  mole  on  her  lip  which  made  her  much
prettier.  Pierre  was  received  as  if  he  were  a
corpse  or  a  leper.  The  eldest  princess  paused
in  her  reading  and  silently  stared  at  him  with
frightened  eyes;  the  second  assumed  precisely
the  same  expression;  while  the  youngest,  the
one  with  the  mole,  who  was  of  a  cheerful  and
lively  disposition,  bent  over  her  frame  to  hide
a  smile  probably  evoked  by  the  amusing  scene
she  foresaw.  She  drew  her  wool  down  through
the  canvas  and,  scarcely  able  to  refrain  from
laughing,  stooped  as  if  trying  to  make  out  the
pattern.

"How  do  you  do,  cousin?"  said  Pierre.  "You
don't  recognize  me?"

"I  recognize  you  only  too  well,  too  well."

"How  is  the  count?  Can  I  see  him?"  asked
Pierre,  awkwardly  as  usual,  but  unabashed.

"The  count  is  suffering  physically  and  men-
tally, and  apparently  you  have  done  your  best
to  increase  his  mental  sufferings."

"Can  I  see  the  count?"  Pierre  again  asked.

"Hm If  you  wish  to  kill  him,  to  kill  him

outright,  you  can  see  him  .  . .  Olga,  go  and  see
whether  Uncle's  beef  tea  is  ready— it  is  almost
time,"  she  added,  giving  Pierre  to  understand
that  they  were  busy,  and  busy  making  his  fa-
ther comfortable,  while  evidently  he,  Pierre,
was  only  busy  causing  him  annoyance.

Olga  went  out.  Pierre  stood  looking  at  the
sisters;  then  he  bowed  and  said:  "Then  I  will
go  to  my  rooms.  You  will  let  me  know  when  I
can  see  him."

And  he  left  the  room,  followed  by  the  low
but  ringing  laughter  of  the  sister  with  the  mole.

Next  day  Prince  Vasili  had  arrived  and  set-
tled in  the  count's  house.  He  sent  for  Pierre
and  said  to  him:  "My  dear  fellow,  if  you  are
going  to  behave  here  as  you  did  in  Petersburg,
you  will  end  very  badly;  that  is  all  I  have  to  say
to  you.  The  count  is  very,  very  ill,  and  you
must  not  see  him  at  all."

Since  then  Pierre  had  not  been  disturbed


and  had  spent  the  whole  time  in  his  rooms  up-
stairs. c

When  Boris  appeared  at  his  door  Pierre  was
pacing  up  and  down  his  room,  stopping  occa-
sionally at  a  corner  to  make  menacing  gestures
at  the  wall,  as  if  running  a  sword  through  an
invisible  foe,  and  glaring  savagely  over  his
spectacles,  and  then  again  resuming  his  walk,
muttering  indistinct  words,  shrugging  his
shoulders  and  gesticulating.

"England  is  done  for,"  said  he,  scowling  and
pointing  his  finger  at  someone  unseen.  "Mr.
Pitt,  as  a  traitor  to  the  nation  and  to  the  rights
of  man,  is  sentenced  to  . . ."  But  before  Pierre
—who  at  that  moment  imagined  himself  to  be
Napoleon  in  person  and  to  have  just  effected
the  dangerous  crossing  of  the  Straits  of  Dover
and  captured  London— could  pronounce  Pitt's
sentence,  he  saw  a  well-built  and  handsome
young  officer  entering  his  room.  Pierre  paused.
He  had  left  Moscow  when  Boris  was  a  boy  01
fourteen,  and  had  quite  forgotten  him,  but  in
his  usual  impulsive  and  hearty  way  he  took
Boris  by  the  hand  with  a  friendly  smile.

"Do  you  remember  me?"  asked  Boris  quietly
with  a  pleasant  smile.  "I  have  come  with  my
mother  to  see  the  count,  but  it  seems  he  is  not
well."

"Yes,  it  seems  he  is  ill.  People  are  always  dis-
turbing him,"  answered  Pierre,  trying  to  re-
member who  this  young  man  was.

Boris  felt  that  Pierre  did  not  recognize  him
but  did  not  consider  it  necessary  to  introduce
himself,  and  without  experiencing  the  least  em-
barrassment looked  Pierre  straight  in  the  face.

"Count  Rostov  asks  you  to  come  to  dinner
today,"  said  he,  after  a  considerable  pause  which
made  Pierre  feel  uncomfortable.

"Ah,  Count  Rostov  1"  exclaimed  Pierre  joy-
fully. "Then  you  are  his  son,  Ilyd?Only  fancy,!
didn't  know  you  at  first.  Do  you  remember  how
we  went  to  the  Sparrow  Hills  with  Madame
Jacquot?  . . .  It's  such  an  age  ..."

"You  are  mistaken,"  said  Boris  deliberately,
with  a  bold  and  slightly  sarcastic  smile.  "I  am
Boris,  son  of  Princess  Anna  Mikh&ylovna  Dru-
betskdya.  Rost6v,  the  father,  is  Ilya,  and  his
son  is  Nicholas.  I  never  knew  any  Madame  Jac-
quot."

Pierre  shook  his  head  and  arms  as  if  attacked
by  mosquitoes  or  bees.

"Oh  dear,  what  am  I  thinking  about?  I've
mixed  every  thing  up.  One  has  so  many  relatives
in  Moscow  I  So  you  are  Boris?  Of  course.  Well,
now  we  know  where  we  are.  And  what  do  you
think  of  the  Boulogne  expedition?  The  English


BOOK  ONE


•will  come  off  badly,  you  know,  if  Napoleon  gets
across  the  Channel.  I  think  the  expedition  is
quite  feasible.  If  only  Villeneuve  doesn't  make
a  mess  of  things!"

Boris  knew  nothing  about  the  Boulogne  ex-
pedition; he  did  not  read  the  papers  and  it  was
the  first  time  he  had  heard  Villeneuve's  name.

"We  here  in  Moscow  are  more  occupied  with
dinner  parties  and  scandal  than  with  politics,"
said  he  in  his  quiet  ironical  tone.  "I  know  noth-
ing about  it  and  have  not  thought  about  it.
Moscow  is  chiefly  busy  with  gossip,"  he  contin-
ued. "Just  now  they  are  talking  about  you  and
your  father."

Pierre  smiled  in  his  good-natured  way  as  if
afraid  for  his  companion's  sake  that  the  latter
might  say  something  he  would  afterwards  re-
gret. But  Boris  spoke  distinctly,  clearly,  and  dry-
ly, looking  straight  into  Pierre's  eyes.

"Moscow  has  nothing  else  to  do  but  gossip,"
Boris  went  on.  "Everybody  is  wondering  to
whom  the  count  will  leave  his  fortune,  though
he  may  perhaps  outlive  us  all,  as  I  sincerely
hope  he  will ..."

"Yes,  it  is  all  very  horrid,"  interrupted
Pierre,  "very  horrid."

Pierre  was  still  afraid  that  this  officer  might
inadvertently  say  something  disconcerting  to
himself.

"And  it  must  seem  to  you,"  said  Boris  flush-
ing slightly,  but  not  changing  his  tone  or  atti-
tude, "it  must  seem  to  you  that  everyone  is  try-
ing to  get  something  out  of  the  rich  man?"

"So  it  does,"  thought  Pierre.

"But  I  just  wish  to  say,  to  avoid  misunder-
standings, that  you  are  quite  mistaken  if  you
reckon  me  or  my  mother  among  such  people.
We  are  very  poor,  but  for  my  own  part  at  any
rate,  for  the  very  reason  that  your  father  is  rich,
I  don't  regard  myself  as  a  relation  of  his,  and
neither  I  nor  my  mother  would  ever  ask  or  take
anything  from  him."

For  a  long  time  Pierre  could  not  understand,
but  when  he  did,  he  jumped  up  from  the  sofa,
seized  Boris  under  the  el  bow  in  his  quick,  clum-
sy way,  and,  blushing  far  more  than  Boris,  be-
gan to  speak  with  a  feeling  of  mingled  shame
and  vexation.

"Well,  this  is  strange!  Do  you  suppose  I ...
who  could  think? ...  I  know  very  well . . ."

But  Boris  again  interrupted  him.

"I  am  glad  I  have  spoken  out  fully.  Perhaps
you  did  not  like  it?  You  must  excuse  me,"  said
he,  putting  Pierre  at  ease  instead  of  being  put
at  ease  by  him,  "but  I  hope  I  have  not  offended
you.  I  always  make  it  a  rule  to  speak  out.  . .  .


Well,  what  answer  am  I  to  take?  Will  you  come
to  dinner  at  the  Rostrivs'?"

And  Boris,  having  apparently  relieved  him-
self of  an  onerous  duty  and  extricated  himself
from  an  awkward  situation  and  placed  another
in  it,  became  quite  pleasant  again.

"No,  but  I  say,"  said  Pierre,  calming  down,
"you  are  a  wonderful  fellowl  What  you  have
just  said  is  good,  very  good.  Of  course  you  don't
know  me.  We  have  not  met  for  such  a  long
time  . . .  not  since  we  were  children.  You  might
think  that  I ...  I  understand,  quite  understand.
I  could  not  have  done  it  myself,  I  should  not
have  had  the  courage,  but  it's  splendid.  I  am
very  glad  to  have  made  your  acquaintance.  It's
queer,"  he  added  a  f  ter  a  pause,  "that  you  should
have  suspected  me!"  He  began  to  laugh.  "Well,
what  of  it!  I  hope  we'll  get  better  acquainted,"
and  he  pressed  Boris'  hand.  "Do  you  know,  I
have  not  once  been  in  to  see  the  count.  He  has

not  sent  forme I  am  sorry  for  him  as  a  man,

but  what  can  one  do?"

"And  so  you  think  Napoleon  will  manage  to
get  an  army  across?"  asked  Boris  with  a  smile.

Pierre  saw  that  Boris  wished  to  change  the
subject,  and  being  of  the  same  mind  he  began
explaining  the  advantages  and  disadvantages
of  the  Boulogne  expedition.

A  footman  came  in  to  summon  Boris— the
princess  was  going.  Pierre,  in  order  to  make
Boris'  better  acquaintance,  promised  to  come
to  dinner,  and  warmly  pressing  his  hand  looked
affectionately  over  his  spectacles  into  Boris*
eyes.  After  he  had  gone  Pierre  continued  pac-
ing up  and  down" the  room  for  a  long  time,  no
longer  piercing  an  imaginary  foe  with  his  im-
aginary sword,  but  smiling  at  the  remembrance
of  that  pleasant,  intelligent,  and  resoluteyoung
man.

J  As  often  happens  in  early  youth,  especially
to  one  who  leads  a  lonely  life,  he  felt  an  unac-
countable tenderness  for  this  young  man  and
made  up  his  mind  that  they  would  be  friends.

Prince  Vasili  saw  the  princess  off.  She  held  a
handkerchief  to  her  eyes  and  her  face  was  tear-
ful.

"It  is  dreadful,  dreadful!"  she  was  saying,
"but  cost  me  what  it  may  I  shall  do  my  duty.  I
will  come  and  spend  the  night.  He  must  not  be
left  like  this.  Every  moment  is  precious.  I  can't
think  why  his  nieces  put  it  off.  Perhaps  God
will  help  me  to  find  a  way  to  prepare  him  I . . .
Adieu,  Prince!  May  God  support  you  . . ."

"Adieu,  ma  bonne/'  answered  Prince  Vasili
turning  away  from  her.

"Oh,  he  is  in  a  dreadful  state,"  said  the  moth-


3o  WAR  AND  PEACE

er  to  her  son  when  they  were  in  the  carriage.
"He  hardly  recognizes  anybody."

"I  don't  understand,  Mamma— what  is  his  at-
titude to  Pierre?"  asked  the  son.

"The  will  will  show  that,  my  dear;  our  fate
also  depends  on  it."

"But  why  do  you  expect  that  he  will  leave  us
anything?"

"Ah,  my  dear!  He  is  so  rich,  and  we  are  so
poor!"

"Well,  that  is  hardly  a  sufficient  reason,
Mamma . . ."

"Oh,  Heaven!  How  ill  he  is!"  exclaimed  the
mother.


CHAPTER  XVII

AFTER  ANNA  MIKHAYLOVNA  had  driven  off  with
her  son  to  visit  Count  Cyril  Vladfmirovich  Be-
ziikhov,  Countess  Rost6va  sat  for  a  long  time
all  alone  applying  her  handkerchief  to  her  eyes.
At  last  she  rang.

"What  is  the  matter  with  you,  my  dear?"  she
said  crossly  to  the  maid  who  kept  her  waiting
some  minutes.  "Don't  you  wish  to  serve  me?
Then  I'll  find  you  another  place."

The  countess  was  upset  by  her  friend's  sor-
row and  humiliating  poverty,  and  was  there-
fore out  of  sorts,  a  state  of  mind  which  with  her
always  found  expression  in  calling  her  maid
"my  dear"  and  speaking  to  her  with  exaggerat-
ed politeness.

"I  am  very  sorry,  ma'am,"  answered  the  maid.

"Ask  the  count  to  come  to  me."

The  count  came  waddling  in  to  see  his  wife
with  a  rather  guilty  look  as  usual.

"Well,  little  countess?  What  a  saute  of  game
au  madere  we  are  to  have,  my  dear!  I  tasted  it.
The  thousand  rubles  I  paid  for  Taras  were  not
ill-spent.  He  is  worth  it!"

He  sat  down  by  his  wife,  his  elbows  on  his
knees  and  his  hands  ruffling  his  gray  hair.

"What  are  your  commands,  little  countess?"

"You  see,  my  dear  .  .  .  What's  that  mess?"
she  said,  pointing  to  his  waistcoat.  "It's  the
saute,  most  likely,"  she  added  with  a  smile.
"Well,  you  see,  Count,  I  want  some  money."

Her  face  became  sad.

"Oh,  little  countess!"  . . .  and  the  count  be-
gan bustling  to  get  out  his  pocketbook.

"I  want  a  great  deal,  Count!  I  want  five  hun-
dred rubles,"  and  taking  out  her  cambric  hand-
kerchief she  began  wiping  her  husband's  waist-
coat.

"Yes,  immediately,  immediately!  Hey,  who's
there?"  he  called  out  in  a  tone  only  used  by
persons  who  are  certain  that  those  they  call


will  rvsh  to  obey  the  summons.  "Send  Dmitri
to  me!"

Dmitri,  a  man  of  good  family  who  had  been
brought  up  in  the  count's  house  and  now  man-
aged all  his  affairs,  stepped  softly  into  the  room.

"This  is  what  I  want,  my  dear  fellow,"  said
the  count  to  the  deferential  young  man  who
had  entered.  "Bring  me  . . ."  he  reflected  a  mo-
ment, "yes,  bring  me  seven  hundred  rubles,  yes!
But  mind,  don't  bring  me  such  tattered  and
dirty  notes  as  last  time,  but  nice  clean  ones  for
the  countess."

"Yes,  Dmitri,  clean  ones,  please,"  said  the
countess,  sighing  deeply.

"When  would  you  like  them,  your  excellen-
cy?" asked  Dmitri.  "Allow  me  to  inform  you
.  .  .  But,  don't  be  uneasy,"  he  added,  noticing
that  the  count  was  beginning  to  breathe  heav-
ily and  quickly  which  was  always  a  sign  of  ap-
proaching anger.  "I  was  forgetting  ...  Do  you
wish  it  brought  at  once?"

"Yes,  yes;  just  so!  Bring  it.  Give  it  to  the
countess."

"What  a  treasure  that  Dmftri  is,"  added  the
count  with  a  smile  when  the  young  man  had
departed.  "There  is  never  any  'impossible'
with  him.  That's  a  thing  I  hate!  Everything  is
possible."

"Ah,  money,  Count,  money!  How  much  sor-
row it  causes  in  the  world,"  said  the  countess.
"But  I  am  in  great  need  of  this  sum."

"You,  my  little  countess,  are  a  notorious
spendthrift,"  said  the  count,  and  having  kissed
his  wife's  hand  he  went  back  to  his  study.

When  Anna  Mikhaylovna  returned  from
Count  Bezukhov's  the  money,  all  in  clean  notes,
was  lying  ready  under  a  handkerchief  on  the
countess'  little  table,  and  Anna  Mikhaylovna
noticed  that  something  was  agitating  her.

"Well,  my  dear?"  asked  the  countess.

"Oh,  what  a  terrible  state  he  is  in!  One
would  not  know  him,  he  is  so  ill!  I  was  only
there  a  few  moments  and  hardly  said  a
word  .  .  ."

"Annette,  for  heaven's  sake  don't  refuse  me,"
the  countess  began,  with  a  blush  that  looked
very  strange  on  her  thin,  dignified,  elderly  face,
and  she  took  the  money  from  under  the  hand-
kerchief.

Anna  Mikhaylovna  instantly  guessed  her  in-
tention and  stooped  to  be  ready  to  embrace  the
countess  at  the  appropriate  moment.

"This  is  for  Boris  from  me,  for  his  outfit."

Anna  Mikhdylovna  was  already  embracing
her  and  weeping.  The  countess  wept  too.  They
wept  because  they  were  friends,  and  because


BOOK  ONE


they  were  kindhearted,  and  because  t they—
friends  from  childhood— had  to  think  about
such  a  base  thing  as  money,  and  because  their
youth  was  over. . . .  But  those  tears  were  pleas-
ant to  them  both.

CHAPTER  XVIII

COUNTESS  ROSTOVA,  with  her  daughters  and  a
large  number  of  guests,  was  already  seated  in
the  drawing  room.  The  count  took  the  gentle-
men into  his  study  and  showed  them  his  choice
collection  of  Turkish  pipes.  From  time  to  time
he  went  out  to  ask:  "Hasn't  she  come  yet?"
They  were  expecting  Mdrya  Dmf  trievna  Akhro-
simova,  known  in  society  as  le  terrible  dragon,
a  lady  distinguished  not  for  wealth  or  rank,
but  for  common  sense  and  frank  plainness  of
speech.  Mdrya  Dmitrievna  was  known  to  the
Imperial  family  as  well  as  to  all  Moscow  and
Petersburg,  and  both  cities  wondered  at  her,
laughed  privately  at  her  rudenesses,  and  told
good  stories  about  her,  while  none  the  less  all
without  exception  respected  and  feared  her.

In  the  count's  room,  which  was  full  of  tobac-
co smoke,  they  talked  of  the  war  that  had  been
announced  in  a  manifesto,  and  about  the  re-
cruiting. None  of  them  had  yet  seen  the  man-
ifesto, but  they  all  knew  it  had  appeared.  The
count  sat  on  the  sofa  between  two  guests  who
were  smoking  and  talking.  He  neither  smoked
nor  talked,  but  bending  his  head  first  to  one
side  and  then  to  the  other  watched  the  smok-
ers with  evident  pleasure  and  listened  to  the
conversation  of  his  two  neighbors,  whom  he
egged  on  against  each  other.

One  of  them  was  a  sallow,  clean-shaven  ci-
vilian with  a  thin  and  wrinkled  face,  already
growing  old,  though  he  was  dressed  like  a  most
fashionable  young  man.  He  sat  with  his  legs  up
on  the  sofa  as  if  quite  at  home  and,  having
stuck  an  amber  mouthpiece  far  into  his  mouth,
was  inhaling  the  smoke  spasmodically  and
screwing  up  his  eyes.  This  was  an  old  bachelor,
Shinshfn,  a  cousin  of  the  countess',  a  man  with
"a  sharp  tongue"  as  they  said  in  Moscow  soci-
ety. He  seemed  to  be  condescending  to  his  com-
panion* The  latter,  a  fresh,  rosy  officer  of  the
Guards,  irreproachably  washed,  brushed,  and
buttoned,  held  his  pipe  in  the  middle  of  his
mouth  and  with  red  lips  gently  inhaled  the
smoke,  letting  it  escape  from  his  handsome
mouth  in  rings.  This  was  Lieutenant  Berg,  an
officer  in  the  Semenov  regiment  with  whom
Borfs  was  to  travel  to  join  the  army,  and  about
whom  Natdsha  had  teased  her  elder  sister  Ye*  ra,
speaking  of  Berg  as  her  "intended."  The  count


sat  between  them  and  listened  attentively.  His
favorite  occupation  when  not  playing  boston,
a  card  game  he  was  very  fond  of,  was  that  of
listener,  especially  when  he  succeeded  in  set-
ting two  loquacious  talkers  at  one  another.

"Well,  then,  old  chap,  mon  tres  honorable
Alphonse  Kdrlovich,"  said  Shinshfn,  laughing
ironically  and  mixing  the  most  ordinary  Rus-
sian expressions  with  the  choicest  French
phrases— which  was  a  peculiarity  of  his  speech.
"Vous  comptez  vous  faire  des  rentes  sur  Vttat;*
you  want  to  make  something  out  of  your  com-
pany?"

"No,  Peter  Nikoldevich;  I  only  want  to  show
that  in  the  cavalry  the  advantages  are  far  less
than  in  the  infantry.  Just  consider  my  own  po-
sition now,  Peter  Nikoldevich  . . ."

Berg  always  spoke  quietly,  politely,  and  with
great  precision.  His  conversation  always  re-
lated entirely  to  himself;  he  would  remain  calm
and  silent  when  the  talk  related  to  any  topic
that  had  no  direct  bearingon  himself.  He  could
remain  silent  for  hours  without  being  at  all  put
out  of  countenance  himself  or  making  others
uncomfortable,  but  as  soon  as  the  conversa-
tion concerned  himself  he  would  begin  to  talk
circumstantially  and  with  evident  satisfaction.

"Consider  my  position,  Peter  Nikoldevich.
Were  I  in  the  cavalry  I  should  get  not  more
than  two  hundred  rubles  every  four  months,
even  with  the  rank  of  lieutenant;  but  as  it  is  I
receive  two  hundred  and  thirty,"  said  he,  look-
ing at  Shinshfn  and  the  count  with  a  joyful,
pleasant  smile,  as  if  it  were  obvious  to  him  that
his  success  must  always  be  the  chief  desire  of
everyone  else.

"Besides  that,  Peter  NikoMevich,  by  ex-
changing into  the  Guards  I  shall  be  in  a  more
prominent  position,"  continued  Berg,  "and
vacancies  occur  much  more  frequently  in  the
Foot  Guards.  Then  just  think  what  can  be  done
with  two  hundred  and  thirty  rubles!  I  even
manage  to  put  a  little  aside  and  to  send  some-
thing to  my  father,"  he  went  on,  emitting  a
smoke  ring.

"La  balance  y  est a  A  German  knows  how

to  skin  a  flint,  as  the  proverb  says,"  remarked
Shinshfn,  moving  his  pipe  to  the  other  side  of
his  mouth  and  winking  at  the  count.

The  count  burst  out  laughing.  The  other
guests  seeing  that  Shinshfn  was  talking  came
up  to  listen.  Berg,  oblivious  of  irony  or  indif-
ference, continued  to  explain  how  by  exchang-

1  You  expect  to  make  an  income  out  of  the  gov-
ernment.
1  So  that  squares  matters.


WAR  AND  PEACE


ing  into  the  Guards  he  had  already  gained  a
step  on  his  old  comrades  of  the  Cadet  Corps;
how  in  wartime  the  company  commander  might
get  killed  and  he,  as  senior  in  the  company,
might  easily  succeed  to  the  post;  how  popular
he  was  with  everyone  in  the  regiment,  and  how
satisfied  his  father  was  with  him.  Berg  evident-
ly enjoyed  narrating  all  this,  and  did  not  seem
to  suspect  that  others,  too,  might  have  their
own  interests.  But  all  he  said  was  so  prettily  se-
date, and  the  naivete*  of  his  youthful  egotism
was  so  obvious,  that  he  disarmed  his  hearers.

"Well,  my  boy,  you'll  get  along  wherever  you
go— foot  or  horse— that  I'll  warrant,"  said  Shin-
shin,  patting  him  on  the  shoulder  and  taking
his  feet  off  the  sofa.

Berg  smiled  joyously.  The  count,  followed
by  his  guests,  went  into  the  drawing  room.

It  was  just  the  moment  before  a  big  dinner
when  the  assembled  guests,  expecting  the  sum-
mons to  zakuska*  avoid  engaging  in  any  long
conversation  but  think  it  necessary  to  move
about  and  talk,  in  order  to  show  that  they  are
not  at  all  impatient  for  their  food.  The  host
and  hostess  look  toward  the  door,  and  now  and
then  glance  at  one  another,  and  the  visitors  try
to  guess  from  these  glances  who,  or  what,  they
are  waiting  for— some  important  relation  who
has  not  yet  arrived,  or  a  dish  that  is  not  yet
ready.

Pierre  had  come  just  at  dinnertime  and  was
sitting  awkwardly  in  the  middle  of  the  drawing
room  on  the  first  chair  he  had  come  across,
blocking  the  way  for  everyone.  The  countess
tried  to  make  him  talk,  but  he  went  on  naively
looking  around  through  his  spectacles  as  if  in
search  of  somebody  and  answered  all  her  ques-
tions in  monosyllables.  He  was  in  the  way  and
was  the  only  one  who  did  not  notice  the  fact.
Most  of  the  guests,  knowing  of  the  affair  with
the  bear,  looked  with  curiosity  at  this  big,  stout,
quiet  man,  wondering  how  such  a  clumsy,  mod-
est fellow  could  have  played  such  a  prank  on  a
policeman.

"You  have  only  lately  arrived?"  the  countess
asked  him.

"Out,  madame"  replied  he,  looking  around
him.

"You  have  not  yet  seen  my  husband?"

"Non,  madame."  He  smiled  quite  inappro-
priately.

"You  have  been  in  Paris  recently,  I  believe?
I  suppose  it's  very  interesting."

"Very  interesting."

1  Hors  d'oeuvres.


Ths  countess  exchanged  glances  with  Anna
Mikhdylovna.  The  latter  understood  that  she
was  being  asked  to  entertain  this  young  man,
and  sitting  down  beside  him  she  began  to  speak
about  his  father;  but  he  answered  her,  as  he  had
the  countess,  only  in  monosyllables.  The  other
guests  were  all  conversing  with  one  another.
"The  Razum6vskis . . .  It  was  charming . . .  You
are  very  kind  . . .  Countess  Aprdksina  . . ."  was
heard  on  all  sides.  The  countess  rose  and  went
into  the  ballroom.

"Mirya  Dmitrievna?"  came  her  voice  from
there.

"Herself,"  came  the  answer  in  a  rough  voice,
and  M£rya  Dmitrievna  entered  the  room.

All  the  unmarried  ladies  and  even  the  mar-
ried ones  except  the  very  oldest  rose.  Mdrya
Dmitrievna  paused  at  the  door.  Tall  and  stout,
holding  high  her  fifty-year-old  head  with  its
gray  curls,  she  stood  surveying  the  guests,  and
leisurely  arranged  her  wide  sleeves  as  if  rolling
them  up.  Mdrya  Dmitrievna  always  spoke  in
Russian.

"Health  and  happiness  to  her  whose  name
day  we  are  keeping  and  to  her  children,"  she
said,  in  her  loud,  full-toned  voice  which
drowned  all  others.  "Well,  you  old  sinner," she
went  on,  turning  to  the  count  who  was  kissing
her  hand,  "you're  feeling  dull  in  Moscow,  I
daresay?  Nowhere  to  hunt  with  your  dogs?  But
what  is  to  be  done,  old  man?  Just  see  how  these
nestlings  are  growing  up,"  and  she  pointed  to
the  girls.  "You  must  look  for  husbands  for  them
whether  you  like  it  or  not. . .  ."

"Well,"  said  she,  "how's  my  Cossack?"
(Mdrya  Dmitrievna  always  tailed  Natdsha  a
Cossack)  and  she  stroked  the  child's  arm  as  she
came  up  fearless  and  gay  to  kiss  her  hand.  "I
know  she's  a  scamp  of  a  girl,  but  I  like  her."

She  took  a  pair  of  pear-shaped  ruby  earrings
from  her  huge  reticule  and,  having  given  them
to  the  rosy  Natdsha,  who  beamed  with  the  pleas-
ure of  her  saint's-day  fete,  turned  away  at  once
and  addressed  herself  to  Pierre.

"Eh,  eh,  friendl  Come  here  a  bit,"  said  she,
assuming  a  soft  high  tone  of  voice.  "Come  here,
my  friend  .  .  ."  and  she  ominously  tucked  up
her  sleeves  still  higher.  Pierre  approached,  look-
ing at  her  in  a  childlike  way  through  his  spec-
tacles.

"Come  nearer,  come  nearer,  friendl  I  used  to
be  the  only  one  to  tell  your  father  the  truth
when  he  was  in  favor,  and  in  your  case  it's  my
evident  duty."  She  paused.  All  were  silent,  ex-
pectant of  what  was  to  follow,  for  this  was
clearly  only  a  prelude.


BOOK  ONE


33


"A  fine  lad!  My  wordl  A  fine  lad!  . .  .fHis  fa-
ther lies  on  his  deathbed  and  he  amuses  him-
self setting  a  policeman  astride  a  bear!  For
shame,  sir,  for  shame!  It  would  be  better  if  you
went  to  the  war."

She  turned  away  and  gave  her  hand  to  the
count,  who  could  hardly  keep  from  laughing.

"Well,  I  suppose  it  is  time  we  were  at  table?"
said  Mdrya  Dmftrievna.

The  count  went  in  first  with  Mdrya  Dmftriev-
na, the  countess  followed  on  the  arm  of  a  colo-
nel of  hussars,  a  man  of  importance  to  them  be-
cause Nicholas  was  to  go  with  him  to  the  regi-
ment; then  came  Anna  Mikhdylovna  with
Shinshfn.  Berg  gave  his  arm  to  Vcra.  The  smil-
ing Julie  Karagina  went  in  with  Nicholas.  Aft-
er them  other  couples  followed,  filling  the
whole  dining  hall,  and  last  of  all  the  children,
tutors,  and  governesses  followed  singly.  The
footmen  began  moving  about,  chairs  scraped,
the  band  struck  up  in  the  gallery,  and  the  guests
settled  down  in  their  places.  Then  the  strains
of  the  count's  household  band  were  replaced
by  the  clatter  of  knives  and  forks,  the  voices  of
visitors,  and  the  soft  steps  of  the  footmen.  At
one  end  of  the  table  sat  the  countess  with  Mdrya
Dmitrievna  on  her  right  and  Anna  Mikhaylov-
na  on  her  left,  the  other  lady  visitors  were  far-
ther down.  At  the  other  end  sat  the  count,  with
the  hussar  colonel  on  his  left  and  Shinshin  and
the  other  male  visitors  on  his  right.  Midway
down  the  long  table  on  one  side  sat  the  grown-
up young  people:  Ve"ra  beside  Berg,  and  Pierre
beside  Boris;  and  on  the  other  side  the  children,
tutors,  and  governesses.  From  behind  the  crys-
tal decanters  and  fruit  vases  the  count  kept
glancing  at  his  wife  and  her  tall  cap  with  its
light-blue  ribbons,  and  busily  filled  his  neigh-
bors' glasses,  not  neglecting  his  own.  The  count-
ess in  turn,  without  omitting  her  duties  as  host-
ess, threw  significant  glances  from  behind  the
pineapples  at  her  husband  whose  face  and  bald
head  seemed  by  their  redness  to  contrast  more
than  usual  with  his  gray  hair.  At  the  ladies' end
an  even  chatter  of  voices  was  heard  all  the
time,  at  the  men's  end  the  voices  sounded  loud-
er and  louder,  especially  that  of  the  colonel  of
hussars  who,  growing  more  and  more  flushed,
ate  and  drank  so  much  that  the  count  held  him
up  as  a  pattern  to  the  other  guests.  Berg  with
tender  smiles  was  saying  toVe*ra  that  love  is  not
an  earthly  but  a  heavenly  feeling.  Borfs  was
tellinghis  new  friend  Pierre  who  the  guests  were
and  exchanging  glances  with  Natdsha,  who  was
sitting  opposite.  Pierre  spoke  little  but  exam-
ined the  new  faces,  and  ate  a  great  deal.  Of  the


two  soups  he  chose  turtle  with  savory  patties
and  went  on  to  the  game  without  omitting  a
single  dish  or  one  of  the  wines.  These  latter
the  butler  thrust  mysteriously  forward,  wrapped
in  a  napkin,  from  behind  the  next  man's
shoulders  and  whispered:  "Dry  Madeira"  .  .  .
"Hungarian"  ...  or  "Rhine  wine"  as  the  case
might  be.  Of  the  four  crystal  glasses  engraved
with  the  count's  monogram  that  stood  before
his  plate,  Pierre  held  out  one  at  random  and
drank  with  en  joyment,  gazing  with  ever-increas-
ing amiability  at  the  other  guests.  Nat£sha,who
sat  opposite,  was  looking  at  Borfs  as  girls  of
thirteen  look  at  the  boy  they  are  in  love  with
and  have  just  kissed  for  the  first  time.  Some-
times that  same  look  fell  on  Pierre,  and  that
funny  lively  little  girl's  look  made  him  inclined
to  laugh  without  knowing  why.

Nicholas  sat  at  some  distance  from  S6nya, be-
side Jujie  Karagina,  to  whom  he  was  again  talk-
ing with  the  same  involuntary  smile.  S6nya
wore  a  company  smile  but  was  evidently  tor-
mented by  jealousy;  now  she  turned  pale,  now
blushed  and  strained  every  nerve  to  over-
hear what  Nicholas  and  Julie  were  saying  to
one  another.  The  governess  kept  look  ing  round
uneasily  as  if  preparing  to  resent  any  slight
that  might  be  put  upon  the  children.  The  Ger-
man tutor  was  trying  to  remember  all  the  dish-
es, wines,  and  kinds  of  dessert,  in  order  to  send
a  full  description  of  the  dinner  to  his  people  in
Germany;  and  he  felt  greatly  offended  when
the  butler  with  a  bottle  wrapped  in  a  napkin
passed  him  by.  He  frowned,  trying  to  appear  as
if  he  did  not  want  any  of  that  wine,  but  was
mortified  because  no  one  would  understand
that  it  was  not  to  quench  his  thirst  or  from
greediness  that  he  wanted  it,  but  simply  from  a
conscientious  desire  for  knowledge.

CHAPTER  XIX

AT  THE  MEN'S  end  of  the  table  the  talk  grew
more  and  more  animated.  The  colonel  told
them  that  the  declaration  of  war  had  already
appeared  in  Petersburg  and  that  a  copy,  which
he  had  himself  seen,  had  that  day  been  for-
warded by  courier  to  the  commander  in
chief.

"And  why  the  deuce  are  we  going  to  fight
Bonaparte?"  remarked  Shinshfn.  "He  has
stopped  Austria's  cackle  and  I  fear  it  will  be
our  turn  next."

The  colonel  was  a  stout,  tall,  plethoric  Ger-
man, evidently  devoted  to  the  service  and  pa-
triotically Russian.  He  resented  Shinshfn's  re-
mark.


34


WAR  AND  PEACE


"It  is  for  the  reasson,  my  goot  sir,"  said  he,
speaking  with  a  German  accent,  "for  the  reas-
son zat  ze  Emperor  knows  zat.  He  declares  in  ze
manifessto  zat  he  cannot  fiew  wiz  indifference
ze  danger  vreatening  Russia  and  zat  ze  safety
and  dignity  of  ze  Empire  as  veil  as  ze  sanctity
of  its  alliances . . ."  he  spoke  this  last  word  with
particular  emphasis  as  if  in  it  lay  the  gist  of  the
matter.

Then  with  the  unerring  official  memory  that
characterized  him  he  repeated  from  the  open-
ing words  of  the  manifesto:

. . .  and  the  wish,  which  constitutes  the  Em-
peror's sole  and  absolute  aim— to  establish  peace
in  Europe  on  firm  foundations— has  now  de-
cided him  to  despatch  part  of  the  army  abroad
and  to  create  a  new  condition  for  the  attain-
ment of  that  purpose.

"Zat,  my  dear  sir,  is  vy  ..."  he  concluded,
drinking  a  tumbler  of  wine  with  digijity  and
looking  to  the  count  for  approval.

"Connaissez-vous  le  proverbe: l  'Jerome,  Je-
rome, do  not  roam,  but  turn  spindles  at
home!'?"  said  Shinshfn,  puckering  his  brows
and  smiling.  "Cela  nous  convient  a  merveille*
Suv6rov  now— he  knew  what  he  was  about;  yet
they  beat  him  &  plate  couture?  and  where  are
we  to  find  Suv6rovs  now?  Je  vous  demande  un
peu"'  said  he,  continually  changing  from
French  to  Russian.

"Ve  must  vight  to  the  last  tr-r-op  of  our
ploodl"  said  the  colonel,  thumping  the  table;
"and  ve  must  tie  for  our  Emperor,  and  zen  all
vill  pe  veil.  And  ve  must  discuss  it  as  little  as
po-o-ossible"  ...  he  dwelt  particularly  on  the
word  possible  . . .  "as  po-o-ossible,"  he  ended,
again  turning  to  the  count.  "Zat  is  how  ve  old
hussars  look  at  it,  and  zere's  an  end  of  it!  And
how  do  you,  a  young  man  and  a  young  hussar,
how  do  you  judge  of  it?"  he  added,  addressing
Nicholas,  who  when  he  heard  that  the  war  was
being  discussed  had  turned  from  his  partner
with  eyes  and  ears  intent  on  the  colonel.

"I  am  quite  of  your  opinion,"  replied  Nicho-
las, flaming  up,  turning  his  plate  round  and
moving  his  wineglasses  about  with  as  much  de-
cision and  desperation  as  though  he  were  at
that  moment  facing  some  great  danger.  "J  am
convinced  that  we  Russians  must  die  or  con-
quer," he  concluded,  conscious— as  were  oth-
ers—after the  words  were  uttered  that  his  re-
marks were  too  enthusiastic  and  emphatic  for

1  Do  you  know  the  proverb  ?

1  That  suits  us  down  to  the  ground.

» Hollow.

*  I  just  aak  you  that.


the  occasion  and  were  therefore  awkward.

"Wliat  you  said  just  now  was  splendid!"  said
his  partner  Julie.

Sonya  trembled  all  over  and  blushed  to  her
ears  and  behind  them  and  down  to  her  neck
and  shoulders  while  Nicholas  was  speaking.

Pierre  listened  to  the  colonel's  speech  and
nodded  approvingly.

"That's  fine,"  said  he.

"The  young  man's  a  real  hussar!"  shouted
the  colonel,  again  thumping  the  table.

"What  are  you  making  such  a  noise  about
over  there?"  Mdrya  Dmftrievna's  deep  voice
suddenly  inquired  from  the  other  end  of  the
table.  "What  are  you  thumping  the  table  for?"
she  demanded  of  the  hussar,  "and  why  are  you
exciting  yourself?  Do  you  think  the  French  are
here?"

"I  am  speaking  ze  truce,"  replied  the  hussar
with  a  smile.

"It's  all  about  the  war,"  the  count  shouted
down  the  table.  "You  know  my  son's  going,
Mdrya  Dmftrievna?  My  son  is  going."

"I  have  four  sons  in  the  army  but  still  I  don't
fret.  It  is  all  in  God's  hands.  You  may  die  in
your  bed  or  God  may  spare  you  in  a  battle,"  re-
plied Mdrya  Dmftrievna's  deep  voice,  which
easily  carried  the  whole  length  of  the  table.

"That's  true!"

Once  more  the  conversations  concentrated,
the  ladies'  at  the  one  end  and  the  men's  at  the
other.

"You  won't  ask,"  Natasha's  little  brother  was
saying;  "I  know  you  won't  ask!"

"I  will,"  replied  Nat&sha.

Her  face  suddenly  flushed  with  reckless  and
joyous  resolution.  She  half  rose,  by  a  glance  in-
viting Pierre,  who  sat  opposite,  to  listen  to  what
was  coming,  and  turning  to  her  mother:

"Mammal"  rang  out  the  clear  contralto  notes
of  Her  childish  voice,  audible  the  whole  length
of  the  table.

"What  is  it?"  asked  the  countess,  startled;
but  seeing  by  her  daughter's  face  that  it  was  on-
ly mischief,  she  shook  a  finger  at  her  sternly
with  a  threatening  and  forbidding  movement
of  her  head.

The  conversation  was  hushed.

"Mammal  What  sweets  are  we  going  to
have?"  and  Natasha's  voice  sounded  still  more
firm  and  resolute.

The  countess  tried  to  frown,  but  could  not.
Mdrya  Dmf  trievna  shook  her  fat  finger.

"Cossack!"  she  said  threateningly.

Most  of  the  guests,  uncertain  how  to  regard
this  sally,  looked  at  the  elders.


BOOK  ONE


35


"You  had  better  take  care!  "said  thecountess.

"Mamma!  What  sweets  are  we  going  to
have?"  Natdsha  again  cried  boldly,  with  saucy
gaiety,  confident  that  her  prank  would  betaken
in  good  part.

S6nya  and  fat  little  P£tya  doubled  up  with
laughter.

"You  see!  I  have  asked,"  whispered  Natisha
to  her  little  brother  and  to  Pierre,  glancing  at
him  again.

"Ice  pudding,  but  you  won't  get  any,"  said
Mdrya  Dmftrievna.

Natasha  saw  there  was  nothing  to  be  afraid
of  and  so  she  braved  even  Mdrya  Dmitrievna.

"M£rya  Dmitrievna!  What  kind  of  ice  pud-
ding? I  don't  like  ice  cream."

"Carrot  ices."

"No!  What  kind,  Mdrya  Dmftrievna?  What
kind?"  she  almost  screamed;  "I  want  to  know!"

Marya  Dmftrievna  and  the  countess  burst
out  laughing,  and  all  the  guests  joined  in.  Ev-
eryone laughed,  not  at  Marya  Dmitrievna's  an-
swer but  at  the  incredible  boldness  and  smart-
ness of  this  little  girl  who  had  dared  to  treat
Marya  Dmftrievna  in  this  fashion.

Natasha  only  desisted  when  she  had  been  told
that  there  would  be  pineapple  ice.  Before  the
ices,  champagne  was  served  round.  The  band
again  struck  up,  the  count  and  countess  kissed,
and  the  guests,  leaving  their  seats,  went  up  to
"congratulate"  the  countess,  and  reached
across  the  table  to  clink  glasses  with  the  count,
with  the  children,  and  with  one  another.  Again
the  footmen  rushed  about,  chairs  scraped,  and
in  the  same  order  in  which  they  had  entered
but  with  redder  faces,  the  guests  returned  to
the  drawing  room  and  to  the  count's  study.

CHAPTER  XX

THE  CARD  TABLES  were  drawn  out,  sets  made
up  for  boston,  and  the  count's  visitors  settled
themselves,  some  in  the  two  drawing  rooms,
some  in  the  sitting  room,  some  in  the  library.

The  count,  holding  his  cards  fanwise,  kept
himself  with  difficulty  from  dropping  into  his
usual  after-dinner  nap,  and  laughed  at  every-
thing. The  young  people,  at  the  countess*  in-
stigation, gathered  round  the  clavichord  and
harp.  Julie  by  general  request  played  first.  Aft-
er she  had  played  a  little  air  with  variations  on
the  harp,  she  joined  the  other  young  ladies  in
begging  Natasha  and  Nicholas,  who  were  noted
for  their  musical  talent,  to  sing  something.
Natdsha,  who  wa%  treated  as  though  she  were
grown  up,  was  evidently  very  proud  of  this  but
at  the  same  time  felt  shy.


"What  shall  we  sing?"  she  said.

"  'The  Brook,'  "  suggested  Nicholas.

"Well,  then,  let's  be  quick.  Boris,  come  here,"
said  Natisha.  "But  where  is  S6nya?"

She  looked  round  and  seeing  that  her  friend
was  not  in  the  room  ran  to  look  for  her.

Running  into  S6nya's  room  and  not  finding
her  there,  Natdsha  ran  to  the  nursery,  but  S6n-
yawas  not  there  either.  Natdsha  concluded  that
she  must  be  on  the  chest  in  the  passage.  The
chest  in  the  passage  was  the  place  of  mourning
for  the  younger  female  generation  in  the  Ros-
tov household.  And  there  in  fact  was  S6nya  ly-
ing face  downward  on  Nurse's  dirty  feather
bed  on  the  top  of  the  chest,  crumpling  her  gau-
zy pink  dress  under  her,  hiding  her  face  with
her  slender  fingers,  and  sobbing  so  convulsively
that  her  bare  little  shoulders  shook.  Natasha's
face,  which  had  been  so  radiantly  happy  all
that  saint's  day,  suddenly  changed:  her  eyes  be-
came fixed,  and  then  a  shiver  passed  down  her
broad  neck  and  the  corners  of  her  mouth
drooped.

"S6nya!  What  is  it?  What  is  the  matter?  . . .
Oo  .  .  .  Oo  .  .  .  Oo  ...  1"  And  Natasha's  large
mouth  widened,  making  her  look  quite  ugly,
and  she  began  to  wail  like  a  baby  without  know-
ing why,  except  that  S6nya  was  crying.  Sonya
tried  to  lift  her  head  to  answer  but  could  not,
and  hid  her  face  still  deeper  in  the  bed.  Nata-
sha wept,  sitting  on  the  blue-striped  feather
bed  and  hugging  her  friend.  With  an  effort
S6nya  sat  up  and  began  wiping  her  eyes  and
explaining.

"Nicholas  is  going  away  in  a  week's  time,  his
.  .  .  papers  .  .  .  have  come  ...  he  told  me  him-
self .  .  .  but  still  I  should  not  cry,"  and  she
showed  a  paper  she  held  in  her  hand—with  the
verses  Nicholas  had  written,  "still,  I  should  not
cry,  but  you  can't  ...  no  one  can  understand
.  .  .  what  a  soul  he  has!"

And  she  began  to  cry  again  because  he  had
such  a  noble  soul.

"It's  all  very  well  for  you  ...  I  am  not  envi-
ous ...  I  love  you  and  Boris  also,"  she  went  on,
gaining  a  little  strength;  "he  is  nice  .  .  .  there

are  no  difficulties  in  yourway But  Nicholas

is  my  cousin  .  .  .  one  would  have  to  ...  the
Metropolitan  himself . . .  and  even  then  it  can't
be  done.  And  besides,  if  she  tells  Mamma"
(S6nya  looked  upon  the  countess  as  her  moth-
er and  called  her  so)  "that  I  am  spoiling
Nicholas*  career  and  am  heartless  and  ungrate-
ful, while  truly  .  .  .  God  is  my  witness,"  and
she  made  the  sign  of  the  cross,  "I  love  her  so
much,  and  all  of  you,  only  V^ra  . . .  And  what


WAR  AND  PEACE


for?  What  have  I  done  to  her?  I  am  so  grateful
to  you  that  I  would  willingly  sacrifice  every-
thing, only  I  have  nothing "

S6nya  could  not  continue,  and  again  hid  her
face  in  her  hands  and  in  the  feather  bed.  Nata-
sha began  consoling  her,  but  her  face  showed
that  she  understood  all  the  gravity  of  her
friend's  trouble.

"S6nya,"  she  suddenly  exclaimed,  as  if  she
had  guessed  the  true  reason  of  her  friend's  sor-
row, "I'm  sure  Ve'ra  has  said  something  to  you
since  dinner?  Hasn't  she?"

"Yes,  these  verses  Nicholas  wrote  himself  and
I  copied  some  others,  and  she  found  them  on
my  table  and  said  she'd  show  them  to  Mamma,
and  that  I  was  ungrateful,  and  that  Mamma
would  never  allow  him  to  marry  me,  but  that
he'll  marry  Julie.  You  see  how  he's  been  with
her  all  day  .  .  .  Natasha,  what  have  I  done  to
deserve  it? ..."

And  again  she  began  to  sob,  more  bitterly
than  before.  Natasha  lifted  her  up,  hugged  her,
and,  smiling  through  her  tears,  began  comfort-
ing her.

"Sonya,  don't  believe  her,  darling!  Don't  be-
lieve her!  Do  you  remember  how  we  and  Nich-
olas, all  three  of  us,  talked  in  the  sitting  room
after  supper?  Why,  we  settled  how  everything
was  to  be.  I  don't  quite  remember  how,  but
don't  you  remember  that  it  could  all  be  ar-
ranged and  how  nice  it  all  was?  There's  Uncle
Shinshfn's  brother  has  married  his  first  cousin.
And  we  are  only  second  cousins,  you  know.
And  Boris  says  it  is  quite  possible.  You  know
I  have  told  him  all  about  it.  And  he  is  so  clever
and  so  good!"  said  Natasha.  "Don't  you  cry,
Sonya,  dear  love,darlingS6nya!"  and  she  kissed
her  and  laughed.  "Wra's  spiteful;  never  mind
her!  And  all  will  come  right  and  she  won't  say
anything  to  Mamma.  Nicholas  will  tell  her
himself,  and  he  doesn't  care  at  all  for  Julie."

Natasha  kissed  her  on  the  hair.

Sonya  sat  up.  The  little  kitten  brightened,
its  eyes  shone,  and  it  seemed  ready  to  lift  its
tail,  jump  down  on  its  soft  paws,  and  begin
playing  with  the  ball  of  worsted  as  a  kitten
should.

"Do  you  think  so?  ...  Really?  Truly?"  she
said,  quickly  smoothing  her  frock  and  hair.

"Really,  truly!"  answered  Natdsha,  pushing
in  a  crisp  lock  that  had  strayed  from  under  her
friend's  plaits.

Both  laughed.

"Well,  let's  go  and  sing  'The  Brook/  "

"Come  along!"

"Do  you  know,  that  fat  Pierre  who  sat  op-


posite me  is  so  funny!"  said  Natdsha,  stopping
suddenly.  "I  feel  so  happy!"
And  she  set  off  at  a  run  along  the  passage.
S6nya,  shaking  off  some  down  which  clung
to  her  and  tucking  away  the  verses  in  the  bos-
om of  her  dress  close  to  her  bony  little  chest,
ran  after  Natasha  down  the  passage  into  the
sitting  room  with  flushed  face  and  light,  joy-
ous steps.  At  the  visitors'  request  the  young
people  sang  the  quartette,  "The  Brook,"  with
which  everyone  was  delighted.  Then  Nicholas
sang  a  song  he  had  just  learned:

At  nighttime  in  the  moon's  fair  glow
How  sweet,  as  fancies  wander  freef
To  feel  that  in  this  world  there's  one
Who  still  is  thinking  but  of  thee!

That  while  her  fingers  touch  the  harp
Wafting  sweet  music  o'er  the  lea,

It  is  for  thee  thus  swells  her  heart,
Sighing  its  message  out  to  thee. . . .

A  day  or  two,  then  bliss  unspoilt,
But  oh!  till  then  I  cannot  live!  .  .  .

He  had  not  finished  the  last  verse  before  the
young  people  began  to  get  ready  to  dance  in
the  large  hall,  and  the  sound  of  the  feet  and
the  coughing  of  the  musicians  were  heard  from
the  gallery.

Pierre  was  sitting  in  the  drawing-room  where
Shinshin  had  engaged  him,  as  a  man  recently
returned  from  abroad,  in  a  political  conversa-
tion in  which  several  others  joined  but  which
bored  Pierre.  When  the  music  began  Natasha
came  in  and  walking  straight  up  to  Pierre  said,
laughing  and  blushing:

"Mamma  told  me  to  ask  you  to  join  the
dancers."

"I  am  afraid  of  mixing  the  figures,"  Pierre
replied;  "but  if  you  will  be  my  teacher  .  .  ."
And  lowering  his  big  arm  he  offered  it  to  the
slender  little  girl.

While  the  couples  were  arranging  themselves
and  the  musicians  tuning  up,  Pierre  sat  down
with  his  little  partner.  Natasha  was  perfectly
happy;  she  was  dancing  with  a  grown-up  man,
who  had  been  abroad.  She  was  sitting  in  a  con-
spicuous place  and  talking  to  him  likeagrown-
up  lady.  She  had  a  fan  in  her  hand  that  one  of
the  ladies  had  given  her  to  hold.  Assuming
quite  the  pose  of  a  society  woman  (heaven
knows  when  and  where  she  had  learned  it)  she
talked  with  her  partner,  fanning  herself  and
smiling  over  the  fan.

"Dear,  dear!  Just  look  at  her!"  exclaimed  the
countess  as  she  crossed  the  ballroom,  pointing
to  Natasha.


BOOK  ONE


Natasha  blushed  and  laughed.
"Well,  really,  Mamma!  Why  should  you?
What  is  there  to  be  surprised  at?"

In  the  midst  of  the  third  tcossaise  there  was
a  clatter  of  chairs  being  pushed  back  in  the
sitting  room  where  the  count  and  Mdrya  Dmi-
trievna  had  been  playing  cards  with  the  major-
ity of  the  more  distinguished  and  older  visitors.
They  now,  stretching  themselves  after  sitting
so  long,  and  replacing  their  purses  and  pocket-
books,  entered  the  ballroom.  First  came  Mdrya
Dmitrievna  and  the  count,  both  with  merry
countenances.  The  count,  with  playful  cere-
mony somewhat  in  ballet  style,  offered  his  bent
arm  to  Marya  Dmitrievna.  He  drew  himself
up,  a  smile  of  debonair  gallantry  lit  up  his
face,  and  as  soon  as  the  last  figure  of  the  ecos-
saise  was  ended,  he  clapped  his  hands  to  the
musicians  and  shouted  up  to  their  gallery,  ad-
dressing the  first  violin:

"Semen!  Do  you  know  the  Daniel  Cooper?"

This  was  the  count's  favorite  dance,  which
he  had  danced  in  his  youth.  (Strictly  speak-
ing, Daniel  Cooper  was  one  figure  of  the
anglaise.)

"Look  at  Papa!"  shouted  Natasha  to  the
whole  company,  and  quite  forgetting  that  she
was  dancing  with  a  grown-up  partner  she  bent
her  curly  head  to  her  knees  and  made  the  whole
room  ring  with  her  laughter.

And  indeed  everybody  in  the  room  looked
with  a  smile  of  pleasure  at  the  jovial  old  gen-
tleman, who  standing  beside  his  tall  and  stout
partner,  M£rya  Dmftrievna,  curved  his  arms,
beat  time,  straightened  his  shoulders,  turned
out  his  toes,  tapped  gently  with  his  foot,  and,
by  a  smile  that  broadened  his  round  face  more
and  more,  prepared  the  onlookers  for  what
was  to  follow.  As  soon  as  the  provocatively  gay
strains  of  Daniel  Cooper  (somewhat  resem-
bling those  of  a  merry  peasant  dance)  began
to  sound,  all  the  doorways  of  the  ballroom
were  suddenly  filled  by  the  domestic  serfs— the
men  on  one  side  and  the  women  on  the  other
—who  with  beaming  faces  had  come  to  see  their
master  making  merry.

"Just  look  at  the  masterl  A  regular  eagle  he
is!"  loudly  remarked  the  nurse,  as  she  stood  in
one  of  the  doorways.

The  count  danced  well  and  knew  it.  But  his
partner  could  not  and  did  not  want  to  dance
well.  Her  enormous  figure  stood  erect,  her  pow-
erful arms  hanging  down  (she  had  handed  her
reticule  to  the  countess),  and  only  her  stern
but  handsome  face  really  joined  in  the  dance.


37
What  was  expressed  by  the  whole  of  the  count's
plump  figure,  in  Mdrya  Dmitrievna  found  ex-
pression only  in  her  more  and  more  beaming
face  and  quivering  nose.  But  if  the  count,  get-
ting more  and  more  into  die  swingof  it,  charmed
the  spectators  by  the  unexpectedness  of  his
adroit  maneuvers  and  the  agility  with  which  he
capered  about  on  his  light  feet,  M£rya  Dmi-
trievna produced  no  less  impression  by  slight  ex-
ertions—the  least  effort  to  move  her  shoulders
or  bend  her  arms  when  turning,  or  stamp  her
foot— which  everyone  appreciated  in  view  of
her  size  and  habitual  severity.  The  dance  grew
livelier  and  livelier.  The  other  couples  could
not  attract  a  moment's  attention  to  their  own
evolutions  and  did  not  even  try  to  do  so.  All
were  watching  the  count  and  Mdrya  Dmi-
trievna. Natasha  kept  pulling  everyone  by
sleeve  or  dress,  urging  them  to  "look  at  Papa!"
though  as  it  was  they  never  took  their  eyes  off
the  couple.  In  the  intervals  of  the  dance  the
count,  breathing  deeply,  waved  and  shouted  to
the  musicians  to  play  faster.  Faster,  faster,  and
faster;  lightly,  more  lightly,  and  yet  more  light-
ly whirled  the  count,  flying  round  Marya  Dmi-
trievna, now  on  his  toes,  now  on  his  heels;  un-
til, turning  his  partner  round  to  her  seat,  he
executed  the  final  pas,  raising  his  soft  foot  back-
wards, bowing  his  perspiring  head,  smiling  and
making  a  wide  sweep  with  his  arm,  amid  a
thunder  of  applause  and  laughter  led  by  Nata-
sha. Both  partners  stood  still,  breathing  heavily
and  wiping  their  faces  with  their  cambric
handkerchiefs.

"That's  how  we  used  to  dance  in  our  time,
ma  chere"  said  the  count.

"That  was  a  Daniel  Cooper!"  exclaimed
Mdrya  Dmftrievna,  tucking  up  her  sleeves  and
puffing  heavily.

CHAPTER  XXI

WHILE  in  the  Rost6vs'  ballroom  the  sixth  ang-
laise was  being  danced,  to  a  tune  in  which  the
weary  musicians  blundered,  and  while  tired
footmen  and  cooks  were  getting  the  supper,
Count  Beziikhov  had  a  sixth  stroke.  The  doc-
tors pronounced  recovery  impossible.  After  a
mute  confession,  communion  was  administered
to  the  dying  man,  preparations  made  for  the
sacrament  of  unction,  and  in  his  house  there
was  the  bustle  and  thrill  of  suspense  usual  at
such  moments.  Outside  the  house,  beyond  the
gates,  a  group  of  undertakers,  who  hid  when-
ever a  carriage  drove  up,  waited  in  expectation
of  an  important  order  for  an  expensive  funer-
al. The  Military  Governor  of  Moscow,  who


WAR  AND  PEACE


had  been  assiduous  in  sending  aides-de-camp
to  inquire  after  the  count's  health,  came  him-
self that  evening  to  bid  a  last  farewell  to  the
celebrated  grandee  of  Catherine's  court,  Count
Bezukhov.

The  magnificent  reception  room  was  crowd-
ed. Everyone  stood  up  respectfully  when  the
Military  Governor,  having  stayed  about  half
an  hour  alone  with  the  dying  man,  passed  out,
slightly  acknowledging  their  bows  and  trying
to  escape  as  quickly  as  possible  from  the  glances
fixed  on  him  by  the  doctors,  clergy,  and  rela-
tives of  the  family.  Prince  Vasfli,  who  had
grown  thinner  and  paler  during  the  last  few
days,  escorted  him  to  the  door,  repeating  some-
thing to  him  several  times  in  low  tones.

When  the  Military  Governor  had  gone,
Prince  Vasfli  sat  down  all  alone  on  a  chair  in
the  ballroom,  crossing  one  leg  high  over  the
other,  leaning  his  elbow  on  his  knee  and  cover-
ing his  face  with  his  hand.  After  sitting  so  for  a
while  he  rose,  and,  looking  about  him  with
frightened  eyes,  went  with  unusually  hurried
steps  down  the  long  corridor  leading  to  the
back  of  the  house,  to  the  room  of  the  eldest
princess.

Those  who  were  in  the  dimly  lit  reception
room  spoke  in  nervous  whispers,  and,  when-
ever anyone  went  into  or  came  from  the  dying
man's  room,  grew  silent  and  gazed  with  eyes
full  of  curiosity  or  expectancy  at  his  door,
which  creaked  slightly  when  opened.

"The  limits  of  human  life  .  . .  are  fixed  and
may  not  be  o'erpassed,"  said  an  old  priest  to  a
lady  who  had  taken  a  seat  beside  him  and  was
listening  naively  to  his  words.

"I  wonder,  is  it  not  too  late  to  administer
unction?"  asked  the  lady,  adding  the  priest's
clerical  title,  as  if  she  had  no  opinion  of  her
own  on  the  subject.

"Ah,  madam,  it  is  a  great  sacrament,"  replied
the  priest,  passing  his  hand  over  the  thin  griz-
zled strands  of  hair  combed  back  across  his
bald  head.

"Who  was  that? The  Military  Governor  him-
self?" was  being  asked  at  the  other  side  of  the
room.  "How  young-looking  he  is!"

"Yes,  and  he  is  over  sixty.  I  hear  the  count
no  longer  recognizes  anyone.  They  wished  to
administer  the  sacrament  of  unction."

"I  knew  someone  who  received  that  sacra-
ment seven  times."

The  second  princess  had  just  come  from  the
sickroom  with  her  eyes  red  from  weeping  and
sat  down  beside  Dr.  Lorrain,  who  was  sitting
in  a  graceful  pose  under  a  portrait  of  Cather-


ine, leaning  his  elbow  on  a  table.

"Beautiful,"  said  the  doctor  in  answer  to  a
remark  about  the  weather.  "The  weather  is
beautiful,  Princess;  and  besides,  in  Moscow
one  feels  as  if  one  were  in  the  country."

"Yes,  indeed,"  replied  the  princess  with  a
sigh.  "So  he  may  have  something  to  drink?"

Lorrain  considered.

"Has  he  taken  his  medicine?"

"Yes."

The  doctor  glanced  at  his  watch.

"Take  a  glass  of  boiled  water  and  put  a
pinch  of  cream  of  tartar,"  and  he  indicated
with  his  delicate  fingers  what  he  meant  by  a
pinch.

"Dere  has  neffer  been  a  gase,"a  German  doc-
tor was  saying  to  an  aide-de-camp,  "dat  one
liffs  after  de  sird  sdroke."

"Arid  what  a  well-preserved  man  he  was  {"re-
marked the  aide-de-camp.  "And  who  will  in-
herit his  wealth?"  he  added  in  a  whisper.

"It  von't  go  begging,"  replied  the  German
with  a  smile.

Everyone  again  looked  toward  the  door,
which  creaked  as  the  second  princess  went  in
with  the  drink  she  had  prepared  according  to
Lorrain's  instructions.  The  German  doctor
went  up  to  Lorrain.

"Do  you  think  he  can  last  till  morning?"
asked  the  German,  addressing  Lorrain  in
French  which  he  pronounced  badly.

Lorrain,  pursing  up  his  lips,  waved  a  severe-
ly negative  finger  before  his  nose.

"Tonight,  not  later,"  said  he  in  a  low  voice,
and  he  moved  away  with  a  decorous  smile  of
self-satisfaction  at  being  able  clearly  to  under-
stand and  state  the  patient's  condition.

Meanwhile  Prince  Vasili  had  opened  the
door  into  the  princess'  room.

In  this  room  it  was  almost  dark;  only  two
tiny  lamps  were  burning  before  the  icons  and
there  was  a  pleasant  scent  of  flowers  and  burnt
pastilles.  The  room  was  crowded  with  small
pieces  of  furniture,  whatnots,  cupboards,  and
little  tables.  The  quilt  of  a  high,  white  feather
bed  was  just  visible  behind  a  screen.  A  small
dog  began  to  bark.

"Ah,  is  it  you,  cousin?"

She  rose  and  smoothed  her  hair,  which  was
as  usual  so  extremely  smooth  that  it  seemed  to
be  made  of  one  piece  with  her  head  and  cov-
ered with  varnish.

"Has  anything  happened?"  she  asked.  "I  am
so  terrified."

"No,  there  is  no  change.  I  only  came  to  have


BOOK  ONE


39


a  talk  about  business,  Catiche," l  muttered  the
prince,  seating  himself  wearily  on  the  chair  she
had  just  vacated.  "You  have  made  the  place
warm,  I  must  say,"  he  remarked.  "Well,  sit
down:  let's  have  a  talk."

"I  thought  perhaps  something  had  hap-
pened/' she  said  with  her  unchanging  stonily
severe  expression;  and,  sitting  down  opposite
the  prince,  she  prepared  to  listen.

"I  wished  to  get  a  nap,  mon  cousin,  but  I
can't."

"Well,  my  dear?"  said  Prince  Vasili,  taking
her  hand  and  bending  it  downwards  as  was  his
habit.

It  was  plain  that  this  "well?"  referred  to
much  that  they  both  understood  without  nam-
ing.

The  princess,  who  had  a  straight,  rigid  body,
abnormally  long  for  her  legs,  looked  directly  at
Prince  Vasfli  with  no  sign  of  emotion  in  her
prominent  gray  eyes.  Then  she  shook  her  head
and  glanced  up  at  the  icons  with  a  sigh.  This
might  have  been  taken  as  an  expression  of  sor-
row and  devotion,  or  of  weariness  and  hope  of
resting  before  long.  Prince  Vasili  understood
it  as  an  expression  of  weariness.

"And  I?"  he  said;  "do  you  think  it  is  easier
for  me?  I  am  as  worn  out  as  a  post  horse,  but
still  I  must  have  a  talk  with  you,  Catiche,  a
very  serious  talk."

Prince  Vasfli  said  no  more  and  his  cheeks  be-
gan to  twitch  nervously,  now  on  one  side,  now
on  the  other,  giving  his  face  an  unpleasant  ex-
pression which  was  never  to  be  seen  on  it  in  a
drawing  room.  His  eyes  too  seemed  strange;  at
one  moment  they  looked  impudently  sly  and
at  the  next  glanced  round  in  alarm.

The  princess,  holding  her  little  dog  on  her
lap  with  her  thin  bony  hands,  looked  atten-
tively into  Prince  Vasfli's  eyes  evidently  re-
solved not  to  be  the  first  to  break  silence,  if  she
had  to  wait  till  morning.

"Well,  you  see,  my  dear  princess  and  cousin,
Catherine  Semenovna,"  continued  Prince  Va-
sfli, returning  to  his  theme,  apparently  not
without  an  inner  struggle;  "at  such  a  moment
as  this  one  must  think  of  everything.  One  must
think  of  the  future,  of  all  of  you  ...  I  love  you
all,  like  children  of  my  own,  as  you  know."

The  princess  continued  to  look  at  him  with-
out moving,  and  with  the  same  dull  expres-
sion.

"And  then  of  course  my  family  has  also  to  be
considered,"  Prince  Vasili  went  on,  testily
pushing  away  a  little  table  without  looking  at

1  Catherine.


her.  "You  know,  Catiche,  that  wg— you  three
sisters,  Mdmontov,  and  my  wife— are  the  count's
only  direct  heirs.  I  know,  I  know  how  hard  it
is  for  you  to  talk  or  think  of  such  matters.  It  is
no  easier  for  me;  but,  my  dear,  I  am  getting  on
for  sixty  and  must  be  prepared  for  anything.
Do  you  know  I  have  sent  for  Pierre?  The  count,"
pointing  to  his  portrait,  "definitely  demanded
that  he  should  be  called."

Prince  Vasfli  looked  questioningly  at  the
princess,  but  could  not  make  out  whether  she
was  considering  what  he  had  just  said  or  wheth-
er she  was  simply  looking  at  him.

"There  is  one  thing  I  constantly  pray  God
to  grant,  mon  cousin/'  she  replied,  "and  it  is
that  He  would  be  merciful  to  him  and  would
allow  his  noble  soul  peacefully  to  leave  this. . ."

"Yes,  yes,  of  course,"  interrupted  Prince  Va-
sili impatiently,  rubbing  his  bald  head  and  an-
grily pulling  back  toward  him  the  little  table
that  he  had  pushed  away.  "But  ...  in  short,
the  fact  is  ...  you  know  yourself  that  last  win-
ter the  count  made  a  will  by  which  he  left  all
his  property,  not  to  us  his  direct  heirs,  but  to
Pierre."

"He  has  made  wills  enoughl"  quietly  re-
marked the  princess.  "But  he  cannot  leave  the
estate  to  Pierre.  Pierre  is  illegitimate."

"But,  my  dear,"  said  Prince  Vasfli  suddenly,
clutching  the  little  table  and  becoming  more
animated  and  talking  more  rapidly:  "what  if
a  letter  has  been  written  to  the  Emperor  in
which  the  count  asks  for  Pierre's  legitimation?
Do  you  understand  that  in  consideration  of
the  count's  services,  his  request  would  be
granted?  . .  ."

The  princess  smiled  as  people  do  who  think
they  know  more  about  the  subject  under  dis-
cussion than  those  they  are  talking  with.

"I  can  tell  you  more,"  continued  Prince  Va-
sfli, seizing  her  hand,  "that  letter  was  written,
though  it  was  not  sent,  and  the  Emperor  knew
of  it.  The  only  question  is,  has  it  been  de-
stroyed or  not?  If  not,  then  as  soon  as  all  is
over/'  and  Prince  Vasfli  sighed  to  intimate
what  he  meant  by  the  words  all  is  over,  "and
the  count's  papers  are  opened,  the  will  and
letter  will  be  delivered  to  the  Emperor,  and
the  petition  will  certainly  be  granted.  Pierre
will  get  everything  as  the  legitimate  son."

"And  our  share?"  asked  the  princess  smiling
ironically,  as  if  anything  might  happen,  only
not  that.

"But,  my  poor  Catiche,  it  is  as  clear  as  day-
lightl  He  will  then  be  the  legal  heir  to  every-
thing and  you  won't  get  anything.  You  must


WAR  AND  PEACE


know,  my  dear,  whether  the  will  and  letter
were  written,  and  whether  they  have  been  de-
stroyed or  not.  And  if  they  have  somehow  been
overlooked,  you  ought  to  know  where  they  are,
and  must  find  them,  because  . . ."

"What  next?"  the  princess  interrupted,  smil-
ing sardonically  and  not  changing  the  expres-
sion of  her  eyes.  "I  am  a  woman,  and  you  think
we  are  all  stupid;  but  I  know  this:  an  illegiti-
mate son  cannot  inherit  .  .  .  un  bdtard!"  *  she
added,  as  if  supposing  that  this  translation  of
the  word  would  effectively  prove  to  Prince  Va-
sfli the  invalidity  of  his  contention.

"Well,  really,  Catiche!  Can't  you  under-
stand! You  are  so  intelligent,  how  is  it  you  don't
see  that  if  the  count  has  written  a  letter  to  the
Emperor  begging  him  to  recognize  Pierre  as
legitimate,  it  follows  that  Pierre  will  not  be
Pierre  but  will  become  Count  Bezukhov,  and
will  then  inherit  everything  under  the  will?
And  if  the  will  and  letter  are  not  destroyed,
then  you  will  have  nothing  but  the  consola-
tion of  having  been  dutiful  et  tout  ce  qui  s* en-
suit!  *  That's  certain."

"I  know  the  will  was  made,  but  I  also  know
that  it  is  invalid;  and  you,  mon  cousin,  seem  to
consider  me  a  perfect  fool,"  said  the  princess
with  the  expression  women  assume  when  they
suppose  they  are  saying  something  witty  and
stinging.

"My  dear  Princess  Catherine  Semenovna,"
began  Prince  Vasfli  impatiently,  "I  came  here
not  to  wrangle  with  you,  but  to  talk  about
your  interests  as  with  a  kinswoman,  a  good,
kind,  true  relation.  And  I  tell  you  for  the  tenth
time  that  if  the  letter  to  the  Emperor  and  the
will  in  Pierre's  favor  are  among  the  count's
papers,  then,  my  dear  girl,  you  and  your  sisters
are  not  heiressesl  If  you  don't  believe  me,  then
believe  an  expert.  I  have  just  been  talking  to
Dmitri  Oniifrich"  (the  family  solicitor)  "and
he  says  the  same."

At  this  a  sudden  change  evidently  took  place
in  the  princess'  ideas;  her  thin  lips  grew  white,
though  her  eyes  did  not  change,  and  her  voice
when  she  began  to  speak  passed  through  such
transitions  as  she  herself  evidently  did  not  ex-
pect.

"That  would  be  a  fine  thing!"  said  she.  "I
never  wanted  anything  and  I  don't  now."

She  pushed  the  little  dog  off  her  lap  and
smoothed  her  dress.

"And  this  is  gratitude—this  is  recognition  for
those  who  have  sacrificed  everything  for  his

1 A  bastard.

*  And  all  that  follows  therefrom.


sake!"  she  cried.  "It's  splendid!  Fine!  I  don't
want  anything,  Prince."

"Yes,  but  you  are  not  the  only  one.  There
are  your  sisters  . . ."  replied  Prince  Vasfli.

But  the  princess  did  not  listen  to  him.

"Yes,  I  knew  it  long  ago  but  had  forgotten.
I  knew  that  I  could  expect  nothing  but  mean-
ness, deceit,  envy,  intrigue,  and  ingratitude—
the  blackest  ingratitude— in  this  house  .  . ."

"Do  you  or  do  you  not  know  where  that  will
is?"  insisted  Prince  Vasfli,  his  cheeks  twitching
more  than  ever.

"Yes,  I  was  a  fool!  I  still  believed  in  people,
loved  them,  and  sacrificed  myself.  But  only  the
base,  the  vile  succeed!  I  know  who  has  been  in-
triguing!"

The  princess  wished  to  rise,  but  the  prince
held  her  by  the  hand.  She  had  the  air  of  one
who  has  suddenly  lost  faith  in  the  whole  hu-
man race.  She  gave  her  companion  an  angry
glance.

"There  is  still  time,  my  dear.  You  must  re-
member, Catiche,  that  it  was  all  done  casually
in  a  moment  of  anger,  of  illness,  and  was  after-
wards forgotten.  Our  duty,  my  dear,  is  to  recti-
fy his  mistake,  to  ease  his  last  moments  by  not
letting  him  commit  this  injustice,  and  not  to
let  him  die  feeling  that  he  is  rendering  un-
happy those  who ..."

"Who sacrificed  everything  for  him,"  chimed
in  the  princess,  who  would  again  have  risen
had  not  the  prince  still  held  her  fast,  "though
he  never  could  appreciate  it.  No,  mon  cousin/'
she  added  with  a  sigh,  "I  shall  always  remem-
ber that  in  this  world  one  must  expect  no  re-
ward, that  in  this  world  there  is  neither  honor
nor  justice.  In  this  world  one  has  to  be  cun-
ning and  cruel."

"Now  come,  come!  Be  reasonable.  I  know
your  excellent  heart."

"No,  I  have  a  wicked  heart."

"I  know  your  heart,"  repeated  the  prince.  "I
value  your  friendship  and  wish  you  to  have  as
good  an  opinion  of  me.  Don't  upset  yourself,
and  let  us  talk  sensibly  while  there  is  still  time,

be  it  a  day  or  be  it  but  an  hour Tell  me  all

you  know  about  the  will,  and  above  all  where
it  is.  You  must  know.  We  will  take  it  at  once
and  show  it  to  the  count.  He  has,  no  doubt,  for-
gotten it  and  will  wish  to  destroy  it.  You  un-
derstand that  my  sole  desire  is  conscientiously
to  carry  out  his  wishes;  that  is  my  only  reason
for  being  here.  I  came  simply  to  help  him  and
you."

"Now  I  see  it  all!  I  know  who  has  been  in-
triguing—I know!"  cried  the  princess.


BOOK  ONE


"That's  not  the  point,  my  dear."
"It's  that  prot£g£  of  yours,  that  sweet  Prin-
cess   Drubetskaya,    that   Anna   Mikhaylovna
whom  I  would  not  take  for  a  housemaid  .  .  .
the  infamous,  vile  woman  1"

"Do  not  let  us  lose  any  time  . . ."
"Ah,  don't  talk  to  me!  Last  winter  she  whee-
dled herself  in  here  and  told  the  count  such
vile,  disgraceful  things  about  us,  especially  a-
bout  Sophie— I  can't  repeat  them— that  it  made
the  count  quite  ill  and  he  would  not  see  us  for
a  whole  fortnight.  I  know  it  was  then  he  wrote
this  vile,  infamous  paper,  but  I  thought  the
thing  was  invalid."

"We've  got  to  it  at  last— why  did  you  not  tell
me  about  it  sooner?"

"It's  in  the  inlaid  portfolio  that  he  keeps  un-
der his  pillow,"  said  the  princess,  ignoring  his
question.  "Now  I  know!  Yes;  if  I  have  a  sin,  a
great  sin,  it  is  hatred  of  that  vile  woman!"  al-
most shrieked  the  princess,  now  quite  changed.
"And  what  docs  she  come  worming  herself  in
here  for?  But  I  will  give  her  a  piece  of  my
mind.  The  time  will  come!"

CHAPTER  XXII

WHILE  these  conversations  were  going  on  in
the  reception  room  and  the  princess'  room,  a
carriage  containing  Pierre  (who  had  been  sent
for)  and  Anna  Mikhaylovna  (who  found  it  nec-
essary to  accompany  him)  was  driving  into  the
court  of  Count  Beziikhov's  house.  As  the  wheels
rolled  softly  over  the  straw  beneath  the  win-
dows, Anna  Mikhdylovna,  having  turned  with
words  of  comfort  to  her  companion,  realized
that  he  was  asleep  in  his  corner  and  woke  him
up.  Rousing  himself,  Pierre  followed  Anna
Mikhaylovna  out  of  the  carriage,  and  only  then
began  to  think  of  the  interview  with  his  dying
father  which  awaited  him.  He  noticed  that
they  had  not  come  to  the  front  entrance  but  to
the  backdoor.  While  he  was  getting  down  from
the  carriage  steps  two  men,  who  looked  like
tradespeople,  ran  hurriedly  from  the  entrance
and  hid  in  the  shadow  of  the  wall.  Pausing  for
a  moment,  Pierre  noticed  several  other  men  of
the  same  kind  hiding  in  the  shadow  of  the
house  on  both  sides.  But  neither  Anna  Mik-
haylovna nor  the  footman  nor  the  coachman,
who  could  not  help  seeing  these  people,  took
any  notice  of  them.  "It  seems  to  be  all  right,"
Pierre  concluded,  and  followed  Anna  Mikhay-
lovna. She  hurriedly  ascended  the  narrow  dim-
ly lit  stone  staircase,  calling  to  Pierre,  who  was
lagging  behind,  to  follow.  Though  he  did  not
see  why  it  was  necessary  for  him  to  go  to  the


count  at  all,  still  less  why  he  had  to  go  by  the
back  stairs,  yet  judging  byAnnaMikhiylovna's
air  of  assurance  and  haste,  Pierre  concluded
that  it  was  all  absolutely  necessary.  Halfway
up  the  stairs  they  were  almost  knocked  over  by
some  men  who,  carrying  pails,  came  running
downstairs,  their  boots  clattering.  These  men
pressed  close  to  the  wall  to  let  Pierre  andAnna
MikMylovna  pass  and  did  not  evince  the  least
surprise  at  seeing  them  there.

"Is  this  the  way  to  the  princesses'  apart-
ments?" asked  Anna  Mikhaylovna  of  one  of
them.

"Yes,  "replied  a  footman  in  a  bold  loud  voice,
as  if  anything  were  now  permissible;  "the  door
to  the  left,  ma'am."

"Perhaps  the  count  did  not  ask  for  me,"  said
Pierre  when  he  reached  the  landing.  "I'd  bet-
ter go  to  my  own  room."

Anna  Mikhaylovna  paused  and  waited  for
him  to  come  up.

"Ah,  my  friend!"  she  said,  touching  his  arm
as  she  had  done  her  son's  when  speaking  to
him  that  afternoon,  "believe  me  I  suffer  no
less  than  you  do,  but  be  a  man!"

"But  really,  hadn't  I  better  go  away?"  he
asked,  looking  kindly  at  her  over  his  spectacles.

"Ah,  my  dear  friend!  Forget  the  wrongs  that
may  have  been  done  you.  Think  that  he  is  your
father  . . .  perhaps  in  the  agony  of  death."  She
sighed.  "I  have  loved  you  like  a  son  from  the
first.  Trust  yourself  to  me,  Pierre.  I  shall  not
forget  your  interests."

Pierre  did  not  understand  a  word,  but  the
conviction  that  all  this  had  to  be  grew  stronger,
and  he  meekly  followed  Anna  Mikhaylovna
who  was  already  opening  a  door.

This  door  led  into  a  back  anteroom.  An  old
man,  a  servant  of  the  princesses,  sat  in  a  corner
knitting  a  stocking.  Pierre  had  never  been  in
this  part  of  the  house  and  did  not  even  know
of  the  existence  of  these  rooms.  Anna  Mikhay-
lovna, addressing  a  maid  who  was  hurrying
past  with  a  decanter  on  a  tray  as  "my  dear"  and
"my  sweet,"  asked  about  the  princesses'  health
and  then  led  Pierre  along  a  stone  passage.  The
first  door  on  the  left  led  into  the  princesses'
apartments.  The  maid  with  the  decanter  in
her  haste  had  not  closed  the  door  (everything
in  the  house  was  done  in  haste  at  that  time),
and  Pierre  and  Anna  Mikhdylovna  in  passing
instinctively  glanced  into  the  room,  where
Prince  Vasili  and  the  eldest  princess  were  sit-
ting close  together  talking.  Seeing  them  pass,
Prince  Vasili  drew  back  with  obvious  impa-
tience, while  the  princess  jumped  up  and  with


WAR  AND  PEACE


a  gesture  of  desperation  slammed  the  door  with
all  her  might.

This  action  was  so  unlike  her  usual  compo-
sure and  the  fear  depicted  on  Prince  Vasili's
face  so  out  of  keeping  with  his  dignity  that
Pierre  stopped  and  glanced  inquiringly  over
his  spectacles  at  his  guide.  Anna  Mikhdylovna
evinced  no  surprise,  she  only  smiled  faintly
and  sighed,  as  if  to  say  that  this  was  no  more
than  she  had  expected.

"Be  a  man,  my  friend.  I  will  look  after  your
interests,"  said  she  in  reply  to  his  look,  and
went  still  faster  along  the  passage.

Pierre  could  not  make  out  what  it  was  all
about,  and  still  less  what  "watching  over  his
interests"  meant,  but  he  decided  that  all  these
things  had  to  be.  From  the  passage  they  went
into  a  large,  dimly  lit  room  adjoining  the  count's
reception  room.  It  was  one  of  those  sumptuous
but  cold  apartments  known  to  Pierre  only  from
the  front  approach,  but  even  in  this  room  there
now  stood  an  empty  bath,  and  water  had  been
spilled  on  the  carpet.  They  were  met  by  a  dea-
con with  a  censer  and  by  a  servant  who  passed
out  on  tiptoe  without  heeding  them.  They
went  into  the  reception  room  familiar  to
Pierre,  with  two  Italian  windows  opening  in-
to the  conservatory,  with  its  large  bust  and  full-
length  portrait  of  Catherine  the  Great.  The
same  people  were  still  sitting  here  in  almost
the  same  positions  as  before,  whispering  to  one
another.  All  became  silent  and  turned  to  look
at  the  pale  tear-worn  Anna  Mikh£ylovna  as  she
entered,  and  at  the  big  stout  figure  of  Pierre
who,  hanging  his  head,  meekly  followed  her.

Anna  Mikhdylovna's  face  expressed  a  con-
sciousness that  the  decisive  moment  had  ar-
rived. With  the  air  of  a  practical  Petersburg
lady  she  now,  keeping  Pierre  close  beside  her,
entered  the  room  even  more  boldly  than  that
afternoon.  She  felt  that  as  she  brought  with  her
the  person  the  dying  man  wished  to  see,  her
own  admission  was  assured.  Casting  a  rapid
glance  at  all  those  in  the  room  and  noticing
the  count's  confessor  there,  she  glided  up  to
him  with  a  sort  of  amble,  not  exactly  bowing,
yet  seeming  to  grow  suddenly  smaller,  and  re-
spectfully received  the  blessing  first  of  one  and
then  of  another  priest.

"God  be  thanked  that  you  are  in  time,"  said
she  to  one  of  the  priests;  "all  we  relatives  have
been  in  such  anxiety.  This  young  man  is  the
count's  son,"  she  added  more  softly.  "What  a
terrible  moment!"

Having  said  this  she  went  up  to  the  doctor.

"Dear  doctor,"  said  she,  "this  young  man  is


the  count's  son.  Is  there  any  hope?"

The  doctor  cast  a  rapid  glance  upwards  and
silently  shrugged  his  shoulders.  Anna  Mikhiy-
lovna  with  just  the  same  movement  raised  her
shoulders  and  eyes,  almost  closing  the  latter,
sighed,  and  moved  away  from  the  doctor  to
Pierre.  To  him,  in  a  particularly  respectful  and
tenderly  sad  voice,  she  said:

"Trust  in  His  mercy!"  and  pointing  out  a
small  sofa  for  him  to  sit  and  wait  for  her,  she
went  silently  toward  the  door  that  everyone
was  watching  and  it  creaked  very  slightly  as
she  disappeared  behind  it.

Pierre,  having  made  up  his  mind  to  obey  his
monitress  implicitly,  moved  toward  the  sofa
she  had  indicated.  As  soon  as  Anna  Mikhdy-
lovna  had  disappeared  he  noticed  that  the  eyes
of  all  in  the  room  turned  to  him  with  some-
thing more  than  curiosity  and  sympathy.  He
noticed  that  they  whispered  to  one  another,
casting  significant  looks  at  him  with  a  kind  of
awe  and  even  servility.  A  deference  such  as  he
had  never  before  received  «vas  shown  him.  A
strange  lady,  the  one  who  had  been  talking  to
the  priests,  rose  and  offered  him  her  seat;  an
aide-de-camp  picked  up  and  returned  a  glove
Pierre  had  dropped;  the  doctors  became  re-
spectfully silent  as  he  passed  by,  and  moved  to
make  way  for  him.  At  first  Pierre  wished  to
take  another  seat  so  as  not  to  trouble  the  lady,
and  also  to  pick  up  the  glove  himself  and  to
pass  round  the  doctors  who  were  not  even  in
his  way;  but  all  at  once  he  felt  that  this  would
not  do,  and  that  tonight  he  was  a  person  o-
bliged  to  perform  some  sort  of  awful  rite  which
everyone  expected  of  him,  and  that  he  was
therefore  bound  to  accept  their  services.  He
took  the  glove  in  silence  from  the  aide-de-camp,
and  sat  down  in  the  lady's  chair,  placing  his
huge  hands  symmetrically  on  his  knees  in  the
nai've  attitude  of  an  Egyptian  statue,  and  de-
cided in  his  own  mind  that  all  was  as  it  should
be,  and  that  in  order  not  to  lose  his  head  and
do  foolish  things  he  must  not  act  on  his  own
ideas  tonight,  but  must  yield  himself  up  entire-
ly to  the  will  of  those  who  were  guiding  him.

Not  two  minutes  had  passed  before  Prince
Vasili  with  head  erect  majestically  entered  the
room.  He  was  wearing  his  long  coat  with  three
stars  on  his  breast.  He  seemed  to  have  grown
thinner  since  the  morning;  his  eyes  seemed
larger  than  usual  when  he  glanced  round  and
noticed  Pierre.  He  went  up  to  him,  took  his
hand  (a  thing  he  never  used  to  do),  and  drew
it  downwards  as  if  wishing  to  ascertain  wheth-
er it  was  firmly  fixed  on.


BOOK  ONE


43


"Courage,  courage,  my  friend!  He  has^sked
to  see  you.  That  is  well!"  and  he  turned  to  go.

But  Pierre  thought  it  necessary  to  ask:  "How
is  .  .  ."  and  hesitated,  not  knowing  whether  it
would  be  proper  to  call  the  dying  man  "the
count,"  yet  ashamed  to  call  him  "father."

"He  had  another  stroke  about  half  an  hour
ago.  Courage,  my  friend  . . ."

Pierre's  mind  was  in  such  a  confused  state
that  the  word  "stroke"  suggested  to  him  a  blow
from  something.  He  looked  at  Prince  Vasfli  in
perplexity,  and  only  later  grasped  that  a  stroke
was  an  attack  of  illness.  Prince  Vastti  said  some-
thing to  Lorrain  in  passing  and  went  through
the  door  on  tiptoe.  He  could  not  walk  well  on
tiptoe  and  his  whole  body  jerked  at  each  step.
The  eldest  princess  followed  him,  and  the
priests  and  deacons  and  some  servants  also
went  in  at  the  door.  Through  that  door  was
heard  a  noise  of  things  being  moved  about,  and
at  last  Anna  Mikhaylovna,  still  with  the  same
expression,  pale  but  resolute  in  the  discharge
of  duty,  ran  out  and  touching  Pierre  lightly  on
the  arm  said:

"The  divine  mercy  is  inexhaustible!  Unc-
tion is  about  to  be  administered.  Come."

Pierre  went  in  at  the  door,  stepping  on  the
soft  carpet,  and  noticed  that  the  strange  lady,
the  aide-de-camp,  and  some  of  the  servants,  all
followed  him  in,  as  if  there  were  now  no  fur-
ther need  for  permission  to  enter  that  room.

CHAPTER  XXIII

PIERRE  well  knew  this  large  room  divided  by
columns  and  an  arch,  its  walls  hung  round  with
Persian  carpets.  The  part  of  the  room  behind
the  columns,  with  a  high  silk-curtained  mahog-
any bedstead  on  one  side  and  on  the  other  an
immense  case  containing  icons,  was  brightly
illuminated  with  red  light  like  a  Russian  church
during  evening  service.  Under  the  gleaming
icons  stood  a  long  invalid  chair,  and  in  that
chair  on  snowy-white  smooth  pillows,  evident-
ly freshly  changed,  Pierre  saw— covered  to  the
waist  by  a  bright  green  quilt—the  familiar,  ma-
jestic figure  of  his  father,  Count  Beziikhov,
with  that  gray  mane  of  hair  above  his  broad
forehead  which  reminded  one  of  a  lion,  and
the  deep  characteristically  noble  wrinkles  of
his  handsome,  ruddy  face.  He  lay  just  under
the  icons;  his  large  thick  hands  outside  the
quilt.  Into  the  right  hand,  which  was  lying
palm  downwards,  a  wax  taper  had  been  thrust
between  forefinger  and  thumb,  and  an  old  serv-
ant, bending  over  from  behind  the  chair,  held
it  in  position.  By  the  chair  stood  the  priests,


their  long  hair  falling  over  their  magnificent
glittering  vestments,  with  lighted  tapers  in  their
hands,  slowly  and  solemnly  conducting  the
service.  A  little  behind  them  stood  the  two
younger  princesses  holding  handkerchiefs  to
their  eyes,  and  just  in  front  of  them  their  eld-
est sister,  Catiche,  with  a  vicious  and  deter-
mined look  steadily  fixed  on  the  icons,  as  though
declaring  to  all  that  she  could  not  answer  for
herself  should  she  glance  round.  Anna  Mikhdy-
lovna,witha  meek,  sorrowful,  and  all-forgiving
expression  on  her  face,  stood  by  the  door  near
the  strange  lady.  Prince  Vasili  in  front  of  the
door,  near  the  invalid  chair,  a  wax  taper  in  his
left  hand,  was  leaning  his  left  arm  on  the
carved  back  of  a  velvet  chair  he  had  turned
round  for  the  purpose,  and  was  crossing  him-
self with  his  right  hand,  turning  his  eyes  up-
ward each  time  he  touched  his  forehead.  His
face  wore  a  calm  look  of  piety  and  resignation
to  the  will  of  God.  "If  you  do  not  understand
these  sentiments,"  he  seemed  to  be  saying,  "so
much  the  worse  for  you!"

Behind  him  stood  the  aide-de-camp,  the  doc-
tors, and  the  menservants;  the  men  and  wom-
en had  separated  as  in  church.  All  were  silently
crossing  themselves,  and  the  reading  of  the
church  service,  the  subdued  chanting  of  deep
bass  voices,  and  in  the  intervals  sighs  and  the
shuffling  of  feet  were  the  only  sounds  that  could
be  heard.  Anna  Mikhaylovna,  with  an  air  of
importance  that  showed  that  she  felt  she  quite
knew  what  she  was  about,  went  across  the  room
to  where  Pierre  was  standing  and  gave  him  a
taper.  He  lit  it  and,  distracted  by  observing
those  around  him,  began  crossing  himself  with
the  hand  that  held  the  taper.

Sophie,  the  rosy,  laughter-loving,  youngest
princess  with  the  mole,  watched  him.  She
smiled,  hid  her  face  in  her  handkerchief,  and
remained  with  it  hidden  for  awhile;  then  look-
ing up  and  seeing  Pierre  she  again  began  to
laugh.  She  evidently  felt  unable  to  look  at  him
without  laughing,  but  could  not  resist  looking
at  him:  so  to  be  out  of  temptation  she  slipped
quietly  behind  one  of  the  columns.  In  the  midst
of  the  service  the  voices  of  the  priests  suddenly
ceased,  they  whispered  to  one  another,  and  the
old  servant  who  was  holding  the  count's  hand
got  up  and  said  something  to  the  ladies.  Anna
Mikhaylovna  stepped  forward  and, stooping  o-
ver  the  dying  man,  beckoned  to  Lorrain  from
behind  her  back.  The  French  doctor  held  no  ta-
per; he  was  leaning  against  one  of  the  columns
in  a  respectful  attitude  implying  that  he,  a
foreigner,  in  spite  of  all  differences  of  faith,


44


understood  the  full  importance  of  the  rite  now
being  performed  and  even  approved  of  it.  He
now  approached  the  sick  man  with  the  noise-
less step  of  one  in  full  vigor  of  life,  with  his
delicate  white  fingers  raised  from  the  green
quilt  the  hand  that  was  free,  and  turning  side-
ways felt  the  pulse  and  reflected  a  moment.  The
sick  man  was  given  something  to  drink,  there
was  a  stir  around  him,  then  the  people  resumed
their  places  and  the  service  continued.  During
this  interval  Pierre  noticed  that  Prince  Vasili
left  the  chair  on  which  he  had  been  leaning,
and— with  an  air  which  intimated  that  he  knew
what  he  was  about  and  if  others  did  not  under-
stand him  it  was  so  much  the  worse  for  them
—did  not  go  up  to  the  dying  man,  but  passed
by  him,  joined  the  eldest  princess,  and  moved
with  her  to  the  side  of  the  room  where  stood
the  high  bedstead  with  its  silken  hangings.  On
leaving  the  bed  both  Prince  Vasili  and  the
princess  passed  out  by  a  back  door,  but  returned
to  their  places  one  after  the  other  before  the
service  was  concluded.  Pierre  paid  no  more  at-
tention to  thjs  occurrence  than  to  the  rest  of
what  went  on,  having  made  up  his  mind  once
for  all  that  what  he  saw  happening  around  him
that  evening  was  in  some  way  essential.

The  chanting  of  the  service  ceased,  and  the
voice  of  the  priest  was  heard  respectfully  con-
gratulating the  dying  man  on  having  received
the  sacrament.  The  dying  man  lay  as  lifeless
and  immovable  as  before.  Around  him  every-
one began  to  stir:  steps  were  audible  and  whis-
pers, among  which  Anna  Mikhaylovna's  was
the  most  distinct.

Pierre  heard  her  say:

"Certainly  he  must  be  moved  onto  the  bed;
here  it  will  be  impossible  . . ."

The  sick  man  was  so  surrounded  by  doctors,
princesses,  and  servants  that  Pierre  could  no
longer  see  the  reddish-yellow  face  with  its  gray
mane— which,  though  he  saw  other  faces  as  well,
he  had  not  lost  sight  of  for  a  single  moment
during  the  whole  service.  He  judged  by  the
cautious  movements  of  those  who  crowded
round  the  invalid  chair  that  they  had  lifted  the
dying  man  and  were  moving  him.

"Catch  hold  of  my  arm  or  you'll  drop  him!"
he  heard  one  of  the  servants  say  in  a  frightened
whisper.  "Catch  hold  from  underneath.  Here!"
exclaimed  different  voices;  and  the  heavy
breathing  of  the  bearers  and  the  shuffling  of
their  feet  grew  more  hurried,  as  if  the  weight
they  were  carrying  were  too  much  for  them.

As  the  bearers,  among  whom  was  Anna  Mik-
haylovna,  passed  the  young  man  he  caught  a


WAR  AND  PEACE

momentary  glimpse  between  their  heads  and
backs  of  the  dying  man's  high,  stout,  uncovered
chest  and  powerful  shoulders,  raised  by  those
who  were  holding  him  under  the  armpits,  and
of  his  gray,  curly,  leonine  head.  This  head,  with
its  remarkably  broad  brow  and  cheekbones,  its
handsome,  sensual  mouth,  and  its  cold,  majes-
tic expression,  was  not  disfigured  by  the  ap-
proach of  death.  It  was  the  same  as  Pierre  re-
membered it  three  months  before,  when  the
count  had  sent  him  to  Petersburg.  But  now  this
head  was  swaying  helplessly  with  the  uneven
movements  of  the  bearers,  and  the  cold  listless
gaze  fixed  itself  upon  nothing.

After  a  few  minutes'  bustle  beside  the  high
bedstead,  those  who  had  carried  the  sick  man
dispersed.  Anna  Mikhaylovna  touched  Pierre's
hand  and  said,  "Come."  Pierre  went  with  her
to  the  bed  on  which  the  sick  man  had  been  laid
in  a  stately  pose  in  keeping  with  the  ceremony
just  completed.  He  lay  with  his  head  propped
high  on  the  pillows.  His  hands  were  symmetri-
cally placed  on  the  green  silk  quilt,  the  palms
downward.  When  Pierre  came  up  the  count
was  gazing  straight  at  him,  but  with  a  look  the
significance  of  which  could  not  be  understood
by  mortal  man.  Either  this  look  meant  nothing
but  that  as  long  as  one  has  eyes  they  must  look
somewhere,  or  it  meant  too  much.  Pierre  hesi-
tated, not  knowing  what  to  do,  and  glanced  in-
quiringly at  his  guide.  Anna  Mikhdylovna
made  a  hurried  sign  with  her  eyes,  glancing  at
the  sick  man's  hand  and  moving  her  lips  as  if
to  send  it  a  kiss.  Pierre,  carefully  stretching  his
neck  so  as  not  to  touch  the  quilt,  followed
her  suggestion  and  pressed  his  lips  to  the  large-
boned,  fleshy  hand.  Neither  the  hand  nor  a
single  muscle  of  the  count's  face  stirred.  Once
more  Pierre  looked  questioningly  at  Anna
Mikhaylovna  to  see  what  he  was  to  do  next.
Anna  Mikhaylovna  with  her  eyes  indicated  a
chair  that  stood  beside  the  bed.  Pierre  obedi-
ently sat  down,  his  eyes  asking  if  he  were  doing
right.  Anna  Mikhaylovna  nodded  approving-
ly. Again  Pierre  fell  into  the  naively  symmetri-
cal pose  of  an  Egyptian  statue,  evidently  dis-
tressed that  his  stout  and  clumsy  body  took  up
so  much  room  and  doing  his  utmost  to  look  as
small  as  possible.  He  looked  at  the  count,  who
still  gazed  at  the  spot  where  Pierre's  face  had
been  before  he  sat  down.  Anna  Mikhaylovna
indicated  by  her  attitude  her  consciousness  of
the  pathetic  importance  of  these  last  moments
of  meeting  between  the  father  and  son.  This
lasted  about  two  minutes,  which  to  Pierre
seemed  an  hour.  Suddenly  the  broad  muscles


BOOK  ONE


45


and  lines  of  the  count's  face  began  to  twitch.
The  twitching  increased,  the  handsome  skouth
was  drawn  to  one  side  (only  now  did  Pierre
realize  how  near  death  his  father  was),  and
from  that  distorted  mouth  issued  an  indistinct,
hoarse  sound.  Anna  Mikhaylovna  looked  at-
tentively at  the  sick  man's  eyes,  trying  to  guess
what  he  wanted;  she  pointed  first  to  Pierre,  then
to  some  drink,  then  named  Prince  Vasfli  in  an
inquiring  whisper,  then  pointed  to  the  quilt.
The  eyes  and  face  of  the  sick  man  showed  im-
patience. He  made  an  effort  to  look  at  the  serv-
ant who  stood  constantly  at  the  head  of  the
bed.

"Wants  to  turn  on  the  other  side,"  whis-
pered the  servant,  and  got  up  to  turn  the
count's  heavy  body  toward  the  wall.

Pierre'  rose  to  help  him.

While  the  count  was  being  turned  over,  one
of  his  arms  fell  back  helplessly  and  he  made  a
fruitless  effort  to  pull  it  forward.  Whether  he
noticed  the  look  of  terror  with  which  Pierre  re-
garded that  lifeless  arm,  or  whether  some  other
thought  flitted  across  his  dying  brain,  at  any
rate  he  glanced  at  the  refractory  arm,  at  Pierre's
terror-stricken  face,  and  again  at  the  arm,  and
on  his  face  a  feeble,  piteous  smile  appeared,
quite  out  of  keeping  with  his  features,  that
seemed  to  deride  his  own  helplessness.  At  sight
of  this  smile  Pierre  felt  an  unexpected  quiver-
ing in  his  breast  and  a  tickling  in  his  nose,  and
tears  dimmed  his  eyes.  The  sick  man  was  turned
onto  his  side  with  his  face  to  the  wall.  He  sighed.

"He  is  dozing,"  said  Anna  Mikhaylovna,  ob-
serving that  one  of  the  princesses  was  coming
to  take  her  turn  at  watching.  "Let  us  go."

Pierre  went  out.

CHAPTER  XXIV

THERE  WAS  now  no  one  in  the  reception
room  except  Prince  Vasfli  and  the  eldest  prin-
cess, who  were  sitting  under  the  portrait  of
Catherine  the  Great  and  talking  eagerly.  As
soon  as  they  saw  Pierre  and  his  companion  they
became  silent,  and  Pierre  thought  he  saw  the
princess  hide  something  as  she  whispered:

"I  can't  bear  the  sight  of  that  woman."

"Catiche  has  had  tea  served  in  the  small  draw-
ing room,"  said  Prince  Vasili  to  Anna  Mikhay-
lovna. "Go  and  take  something,  my  poor  Anna
Mikhdylovna,  or  you  will  not  hold  out."

To  Pierre  he  said  nothing,  merely  giving  his
arm  a  sympathetic  squeeze  below  the  shoulder.
Pierre  went  with  Anna  Mikhdylovna  into  the
small  drawing  room.

"There  is  nothing  so  refreshing  after  a  sleep-


less night  as  a  cup  of  this  delicious  Russian  tea,"
Lorrain  was  say  ing  with  an  air  of  restrained  an-
imation as  he  stood  sipping  tea  from  a  delicate
Chinese  handleless  cup  before  a  table  on  which
tea  and  a  cold  supper  were  laid  in  the  small
circular  room.  Around  the  table  all  who  were
at  Count  Bezukhov's  house  that  night  had  gath-
ered to  fortify  themselves.  Pierre  well  remem-
bered this  small  circular  drawing  room  with  its
mirrors  and  little  tables.  During  balls  given  at
the  house,  Pierre,  who  did  not  know  how  to
dance,  had  liked  sitting  in  this  room  to  watch
the  ladies  who,  as  they  passed  through  in  their
ball  dresses  with  diamonds  and  pearls  on  their
bare  shoulders,  looked  at  themselves  in  the
brilliantly  lighted  mirrors  which  repeated  their
reflections  several  times.  Now  this  same  room
was  dimly  lighted  by  two  candles.  On  one  small
table  tea  things  and  supper  dishes  stood  in  dis-
order, and  in  the  middle  of  the  night  a  motley
throng  of  people  sat  there,  not  merrymaking,
but  somberly  whispering,  and  betraying  by  ev-
ery word  and  movement  that  they  none  of
them  forgot  what  was  happening  and  what  was
about  to  happen  in  the  bedroom.  Pierre  did  not
eat  anything  though  he  would  very  much  have
liked  to.  He  looked  inquiringly  at  his  moni-
tressand  saw  that  she  was  again  going  on  tiptoe
to  the  reception  room  where  they  had  left
Prince  Vasfli  and  the  eldest  princess.  Pierre
concluded  that  this  also  was  essential,  and  after
a  short  interval  followed  her.  Anna  Mikhdylov-
na  was  standing  beside  the  princess,  and  they
were  both  speaking  in  excited  whispers.

"Permit  me,  Princess,  to  know  what  is  neces-
sary and  what  is  not  necessary, "said  the  young-
er of  the  two  speakers,  evidently  in  the  same
state  of  excitement  as  when  she  had  slammed
the  door  of  her  room.

"But,  my  dear  princess,"  answered  Anna
Mikhaylovna  blandly  but  impressively,  block-
ing the  way  to  the  bedroom  and  preventing  the
other  from  passing,  "won't  this  be  too  much
for  poor  Uncle  at  a  moment  when  he  needs  re-
pose? Worldly  conversation  at  a  moment  when
his  soul  is  already  prepared  . .  ."

Prince  Vasfli  was  seated  in  an  easy  chair  in
his  familiar  attitude,  with  one  leg  crossed  high
above  the  other.  His  cheeks,  which  were  so  flab-
by that  they  looked  heavier  below,  were  twitch-
ing violently;  but  he  wore  the  air  of  a  man  lit-
tle concerned  in  what  the  two  ladies  were  say-
ing.

"Come,  my  dear  Anna  Mikhdylovna,  let  Ca-
tiche do  as  she  pleases.  You  know  how  fond
the  count  is  of  her."


WAR  AND  PEACE


"I  don't  even  know  what  is  in  this  paper,"
said  the  younger  of  the  two  ladies,  addressing
Prince  Vasili  and  pointing  to  an  inlaid  port-
folio she  held  in  her  hand.  "All  I  know  is  that
his  real  will  is  in  his  writing  table,  and  this  is  a
paper  he  has  forgotten. . . ."

She  tried  to  pass  Anna  Mikhdylovna,  but  the
latter  sprang  so  as  to  bar  her  path.

"I  know,  my  dear,  kind  princess,"  said  Anna
Mikhdylovna,  seizing  the  portfolio  so  firmly
that  it  was  plain  she  would  not  let  go  easily.
"Dear  princess,  I  beg  and  implore  you,  have
some  pity  on  him!  ]e  vous  en  conjure  .  .  "

The  princess  did  not  reply.  Their  efforts  in
the  struggle  for  the  portfolio  were  the  only
sounds  Audible,  but  it  was  evident  that  if  the
princess  did  speak,  her  words  would  not  be
flattering  to  Anna  Mikhdylovna.  Though  the
latter  held  on  tenaciously,  her  voice  lost  none
of  its  honeyed  firmness  and  softness.

"Pierre,  my  dear,  come  here.  I  think  he  will
not  be  out  of  place  in  a  family  consultation;  is
lit  not  so,  Prince?"

"Why  don't  you  speak,  cousin?"  suddenly
shrieked  the  princess  so  loud  that  those  in  the
drawing  room  heard  her  and  were  startled.
"Why  do  you  remain  silent  when  heaven
knows  who  permits  herself  to  interfere,  mak-
ing a  scene  on  the  very  threshold  of  a  dying
man's  room?  Intriguer!"  she  hissed  viciously,
and  tugged  with  all  her  might  at  the  portfolio.

But  Anna  Mikhdylovna  went  forward  a  step
or  two  to  keep  her  hold  on  the  portfolio,  and
changed  her  grip.

Prince  Vasili  rose.  "Oh!"  said  he  with  re-
proach and  surprise,  "this  is  absurd!  Come,  let
go  I  tell  you."

The  princess  let  go.

"And  you  too!"

But  Anna  Mikhdylovna  did  not  obey  him.

"Let  go,  I  tell  you!  I  will  take  the  responsi-
bility. I  myself  will  go  and  ask  him,  I!  ...  does
that  satisfy  you?"

"But,  Prince,"  said  Anna  Mikhdylovna,  "aft-
er such  a  solemn  sacrament,  allow  him  a  mo-
ment's peace!  Here,  Pierre,  tell  them  your
opinion,"  said  she,  turning  to  the  young  man
who,  having  come  quite  close,  was  gazing  with
astonishment  at  the  angry  face  of  the  princess
which  had  lost  all  dignity,  and  at  the  twitch-
ing cheeks  of  Prince  Vasili.

"Remember  that  you  will  answer  for  the  con-
sequences," said  Prince  Vasili  severely.  "You
don't  know  what  you  are  doing."

"Vile  woman!"  shouted  the  princess,  dart-
ing unexpectedly  at  Anna  Mikhdylovna  and


snatching  the  portfolio  from  her.

Priice  Vasili  bent  his  head  and  spread  out
his  hands.

At  this  moment  that  terrible  door,  which
Pierre  had  watched  so  long  and  which  had  al-
ways opened  so  quietly,  burst  noisily  open  and
banged  against  the  wall,  and  the  second  of  the
three  sisters  rushed  out  wringing  her  hands.

"What  are  you  doing!"  she  cried  vehemently.
"He  isdyingand  you  leave  me  alone  with  him!"

Her  sister  dropped  the  portfolio.  Anna  Mik-
hdylovna, stooping,  quickly  caught  up  the  ob-
ject of  contention  and  ran  into  the  bedroom.
The  eldest  princess  and  Prince  Vasfli,  recover-
ing themselves,  followed  her,  A  few  minutes  lat-
er the  eldest  sister  came  out  with  a  pale  hard
face,  again  biting  her  underlip.  At  sight  of
Pierre  her  expression  showed  an  irrepressible
hatred.

"Yes,  now  you  may  be  glad!"  said  she;  "this
is  what  you  have  been  waiting  for."  And  burst-
ing into  tears  she  hid  her  face  in  her  handker-
chief and  rushed  from  the  room.

Prince  Vasili  came  next.  He  staggered  to  the
sofa  on  which  Pierre  was  sitting  and  dropped
onto  it,  covering  his  face  with  his  hand.  Pierre
noticed  that  he  was  pale  and  that  his  jaw  quiv-
ered and  shook  as  if  in  an  ague.

"Ah,  my  friend!"  said  he,  taking  Pierre  by
the  elbow;  and  there  was  in  his  voice  a  sincer-
ity and  weakness  Pierre  had  never  observed  in
it  before.  "How  often  we  sin,  how  much  we
deceive,  and  all  for  what?  I  am  near  sixty,  dear
friend  ...  I  too  .  .  .  All  will  end  in  death,  all!
Death  is  awful .  . ."  and  he  burst  into  tears.

Anna  Mikhdylovna  came  out  last.  She  ap-
proached Pierre  with  slow,  quiet  steps.

"Pierre!"  she  said.

Pierre  gave  her  an  inquiring  look.  She  kissed
the  young  man  on  his  forehead,  wetting  him
with  her  tears.  Then  after  a  pause  she  said:

"He  is  no  more "

Pierre  looked  at  her  over  his  spectacles.

"Come,  I  will  go  with  you.  Try  to  weep,  noth-
ing gives  such  relief  as  tears."

She  led  him  into  the  dark  drawing  room
and  Pierre  was  glad  no  one  could  see  his  face.
Anna  Mikhdylovna  left  him,  and  when  she  re-
turned he  was  fast  asleep  with  his  head  on  his
arm.

In  the  morning  Anna  Mikhdylovna  said  to
Pierre:

"Yes,  my  dear,  this  is  a  great  loss  for  us  all,
not  to  speak  of  you.  But  God  will  support  you:
you  are  young,  and  are  now,  I  hope,  in  com-
mand of  an  immense  fortune.  The  will  has  not


BOOK  ONE


47


yet  been  opened.  I  knowyouwell  enough to  be
sure  that  this  will  not  turn  your  head,  out  it
imposes  duties  on  you,  and  you  must  be  a  man."

Pierre  was  silent.

"Perhaps  later  on  I  may  tell  you,  my  dear
boy,  that  if  I  had  not  been  there,  God  only
knows  what  would  have  happened  1  You  know,
Uncle  promised  me  only  the  day  before  yes-
terday not  to  forget  Boris.  But  he  had  no  time.
I  hope,  my  dear  friend,  you  will  carry  out  your
father's  wish?"

Pierre  understood  nothing  of  all  this  and
coloring  shyly  looked  in  silence  at  Princess  An-
na Mikhaylovna.  After  her  talk  with  Pierre,
Anna  Mikhaylovna  returned  to  the  Rost6vs'
and  went  to  bed.  On  waking  in  the  morning  she
told  the  Rostovs  and  all  her  acquaintances  the
details  of  Count  Bezukhov's  death.  She  said  the
count  had  died  as  she  would  herself  wish  to  die,
that  his  end  was  not  only  touching  but  edify-
ing. As  to  the  last  meeting  between  father  and
son,  it  was  so  touching  that  she  could  not  think
of  it  without  tears,  and  did  not  know  which
had  behaved  better  during  those  awful  mo-
ments—the father  who  so  remembered  every-
thing and  everybody  at  the  last  and  had  spoken
such  pathetic  words  to  the  son,  or  Pierre,  whom
it  had  been  pitiful  to  see,  so  stricken  was  he
with  grief,  though  he  tried  hard  to  hide  it  in  or-
der not  to  sadden  his  dying  father.  "It  is  pain-
ful, but  it  does  one  good.  It  uplifts  the  soul  to
see  such  men  as  the  old  count  and  his  worthy
son,"  said  she.  Of  the  behavior  of  the  eldest
princess  and  Prince  Vasili  she  spoke  disapprov-
ingly, but  in  whispers  and  as  a  great  secret.

CHAPTER  XXV

AT  BALD  HILLS,  Prince  Nicholas  Andr£evich
Bolk6nski's  estate,  the  arrival  of  young  Prince
Andrew  and  his  wife  was  daily  expected,  but
this  expectation  did  not  upset  the  regular  rou-
tine of  life  in  the  old  prince's  household.  Gen-
eral in  Chief  Prince  Nicholas  Andre*evich
(nicknamed  in  society,  "the  King  of  Prussia")
ever  since  the  Emperor  Paul  had  exiled  him  to
his  country  estate  had  lived  there  continuously
with  his  daughter,  Princess  Mary,  and  her  com-
panion, Mademoiselle  Bourienne.  Though  in
the  new  reign  he  was  free  to  return  to  the  capi-
tals, he  still  continued  to  live  in  the  country,
remarking  that  anyone  who  wanted  to  see  him
could  come  the  hundred  miles  from  Moscow  to
Bald  Hills,  while  he  himself  needed  no  one  and
nothing.  He  used  to  say  that  there  are  only  two
sources  of  human  vice— idleness  and  supersti-
tion, and  only  two  virtues— activity  and  intel-


ligence. He  himself  undertook  his  daughter's
education,  and  to  develop  these  two  cardinal
virtues  in  her  gave  her  lessons  in  algebra  and
geometry  till  she  was  twenty,  and  arranged  her
life  so  that  her  whole  time  was  occupied.  He
was  himself  always  occupied:  writing  his  mem-
oirs, solving  problems  in  higher  mathematics,
turning  snuffboxes  on  a  lathe,  working  in  the
garden,  or  superintending  the  building  that
was  always  going  on  at  his  estate.  As  regular-
ity is  a  prime  condition  facilitating  activity,
regularity  in  his  household  was  carried  to  the
highest  point  of  exactitude.  He  always  came  to
table  under  precisely  the  same  conditions,  and
not  only  at  the  same  hour  but  at  the  same  min-
ute. With  those  about  him,  from  his  daughter
to  his  serfs,  the  prince  was  sharp  and  invariably
exacting,  so  that  without  being  a  hardhearted
man  he  inspired  such  fear  and  respect  as  few
hardhearted  men  would  have  aroused.  Al-
though he  was  in  retirement  and  had  now  no
influence  in  political  affairs,  every  high  official
appointed  to  the  province  in  which  the  prince's
estate  lay  considered  it  his  duty  to  visit  him  and
waited  in  the  lofty  antechamber  just  as  the  ar-
chitect, gardener,  or  Princess  Mary  did,  till  the
prince  appeared  punctually  to  the  appointed
hour.  Everyone  sitting  in  this  antechamber  ex-
perienced the  same  feeling  of  respect  and  even
fear  when  the  enormously  high  study  door
opened  and  showed  the  figure  of  a  rather  small
old  man,  with  powdered  wig,  small  withered
hands,  and  bushy  gray  eyebrows  which,  when
he  frowned,  sometimes  hid  the  gleam  of  his
shrewd,  youthfully  glittering  eyes.

On  the  morning  of  the  day  that  the  young
couple  were  to  arrive,  Princess  Mary  entered
the  antechamber  as  usual  at  the  time  appoint-
ed for  the  morning  greeting,  crossing  herself
with  trepidation  and  repeating  a  silent  prayer.
Every  morning  she  came  in  like  that,  and  ev-
ery morning  she  prayed  that  the  daily  interview
might  pass  off  well.

An  old  powdered  manservant  who  was  sit-
ting in  the  antechamber  rose  quietly  and  said
in  a  whisper:  "Please  walk  in."

Through  the  door  came  the  regular  hum  of
a  lathe.  The  princess  timidly  opened  the  door
which  moved  noiselessly  and  easily.  She  paused
at  the  entrance.  The  prince  was  working  at  the
lathe  and  after  glancing  round  continued  his
work.

The  enormous  study  was  full  of  things  evi-
dently in  constant  use.  The  large  table  covered
with  books  and  plans,  the  tall  glass-fronted
bookcases  with  keys  in  the  locks,  the  high  desk


48


WAR  AND  PEACE


for  writing  while  standing  up,  on  which  lay  an
open  exercise  book,  and  the  lathe  with  tools
laid  ready  to  hand  and  shavings  scattered
around—all  indicated  continuous,  varied,  and
orderly  activity.  The  motion  of  the  small  foot
shod  in  a  Tartar  boot  embroidered  with  silver,
and  the  firm  pressure  of  the  lean  sinewy  hand,
showed  that  the  prince  still  possessed  the  tena-
cious endurance  and  vigor  of  hardy  old  age.
After  a  few  more  turns  of  the  lathe  he  removed
his  foot  from  the  pedal,  wiped  his  chisel,
dropped  it  into  a  leather  pouch  attached  to  the
lathe,  and,  approaching  the  table,  summoned
his  daughter.  He  never  gave  his  children  a  bless-
ing, so  he  simply  held  out  his  bristly  cheek  (as
yet  unshaven)  and,  regarding  her  tenderly  and
attentively,  said  severely:

"Quite  well?  All  right  then,  sit  down."  He
took  the  exercise  book  containing  lessons  in
geometry  written  by  himself  and  drew  up  a
chair  with  his  foot.

"For  tomorrow!"  said  he,  quickly  finding
the  page  and  making  a  scratch  from  one  para-
graph to  another  with  his  hard  nail.

The  princess  bent  over  the  exercise  book  on
the  table.

"Wait  a  bit,  here's  a  letter  for  you,"  said  the
old  man  suddenly,  taking  a  letter  addressed  in
a  woman's  hand  from  a  bag  hanging  above  the
table,  onto  which  he  threw  it.

At  the  sight  of  the  letter  red  patches  showed
themselves  on  the  princess'  face.  She  took  it
quickly  and  bent  her  head  over  it.

"From  H^loi'se?"  asked  the  prince  with  a
cold  smile  that  showed  hisstill  sound, yellowish
teeth.1

"Yes,  it's  from  Julie,"  replied  the  princess
with  a  timid  glance  and  a  timid  smile.

"I'll  let  two  more  letters  pass,  but  the  third
I'll  read,"  said  the  prince  sternly;  "I'm  afraid
you  write  much  nonsense.  I'll  read  the  third  I"

"Read  this  if  you  like,  Father,"  said  the  prin-
cess, blushing  still  more  and  holding  out  the
letter.

"The  third,!  said  the  third  1"  cried  theprince
abruptly,  pushing  the  letter  away,  and  leaning
his  elbows  on  the  table  he  drew  toward  him
the  exercise  book  containing  geometrical  fig-
ures.

"Well,  madam,"  he  began,  stooping  over  the
book  close  to  his  daughter  and  placing  an  arm
on  the  back  of  the  chair  on  which  she  sat,  so

1  The  prince  is  ironical.  He  knows  the  letter  is
from  Julie,  but  alludes  to  Rousseau's  novel,  Julie,
ou  la  nouvelle  Htloise,  which  he,  an  admirer  of
Voltaire  and  of  cold  reason,  heartily  despised.— TR.


that  she  felt  herself  surrounded  on  all  sides  by
the  skrid  scent  of  old  age  and  tobacco,  which
she  had  known  so  long.  "Now,  madam,  these
triangles  are  equal;  please  note  that  the  angle
ABC  . . ."

The  princess  looked  in  a  scared  way  at  her
father's  eyes  glittering  close  to  her;  the  red
patches  on  her  face  came  and  went,  and  it  was
plain  that  she  understood  nothing  and  was  so
frightened  that  her  fear  would  prevent  her  un-
derstanding any  of  her  father's  further  explana-
tions, however  clear  they  might  be.  Whether  it
was  the  teacher's  fault  or  the  pupil's,  this  same
thing  happened  every  day:  the  princess'  eyes
grew  dim,  she  could  not  see  and  could  not  hear
anything,  but  was  only  conscious  of  her  stern
father's  withered  face  close  to  her,  of  his  breath
and  the  smell  of  him,  and  could  think  only  of
how  to  get  away  quickly  to  her  own  room  to
make  out  the  problem  in  peace.  The  old  man
was  beside  himself:  moved  the  chair  on  which
he  was  sitting  noisily  backward  and  forward,
made  efforts  to  control  himself  and  not  become
vehement,  but  almost  always  did  become  ve-
hement, scolded,  and  sometimes  flung  the  ex-
ercise book  away.